By PastPlayer
Jan 19, 12
This is a guest article from Adam Chapman, a PhD Candidate at the University of Hull in the Media, Culture and Society department. He received a History BA (Hons) from Leeds Metropolitan University and a Cultural History MA at the University of Liverpool before continuing on to study at Hull. Adam’s research focuses on the videogame as an historical form and seeks to weave existing (mainly postmodernist) historical theory and analysis, with game-focused research that emphasizes the unique qualities of games and play as well as, more recently, Gibsonian psychology. Accordingly, he is attempting to develop an analytical framework for historical videogames that includes both action/agency and narrative/representation. Unsurprisingly, Adam is also an avid gamer and when he is not studying he is normally to be found playing some kind of videogame as his digital alter-ego ‘Woodlandstar’. Like most academics that study games, Adam has found he has to restrict the amount of time he spends doing ‘research’ of this kind.’
Few could now deny that contemporary game series like Civilization or Assassin’s Creed constitute history. However, such a broad term does not suffice to infer the approach that analysis of these new historical texts requires. Any apprehension of these hugely-popular historicalvideogames must be grounded in an approach that privileges understanding of the videogame form (and the varying structures this entails) and its integral rolein the production and reception of historical meaning, rather than solely, or even primarily, the content of specific products as historical narratives. This is especially pertinent given the relatively early nature of the serious consideration of historical videogames. Examining the content of particular histories according to what we believe to be accurate is of course a natural part of analysis. However, in terms of modern videogames (at the least), such a focus often really only serves to re-inform us about popular history rather than increasing our understanding of the opportunities for engaging with discourse about the past (and the nature of this discourse) that this new historical form can offer.
Proper analysis of content cannot even occur without consideration of the structures that create and represent it. Content cannot be seen to stand independent of form, history cannot be understood as a category separate from the modes in which it is written, coded, filmed, played, read or viewed. Whilst analysing the historical content of particular videogames can give us some basic information this tells us nothing of how content is created in terms of its stylistic and epistemological approach and nothing of how (or even if) players experience this content. Similarly, such a focus tells us nothing about the opportunities for exploring discourse about the past through play: what actions players can perform and do perform (and the necessity of these actions), when they play. This last concern is integral to understanding games, because, unlike the majority of historical forms, videogames, as well as creating ‘traditional’ opportunities for negotiation of meaning, are actively configured by their audiences. In essence, this means when we play we may well be ‘reading’ (i.e. interpreting and negotiating historical signifiers and narrative) but we are also ‘doing’ (i.e. playing). It is only by focusing on form that we can properly include this latter category of action and create an analytical approach that fuses Salen and Zimmerman’s three schemas of games: play, rules and culture (2004, 102), whilst allowing the consideration of the player’s role in the negotiation and fusion, of this triad. The overt focus on content in some of the scholarly analyses of existing historical videogames is troubling for this very reason.
With these concerns in mind, this article is a call for a refocusing of academic work on historical videogames. A call for an approach that does not get detained by primarily examining the particular historical content of each game (i.e. historical accuracy or what a game ‘says’ about a particular period it depicts) but instead tries to establish an analytical framework that privileges analysis of form (i.e. how the particular audio-visual-ludic structures of the game operate to produce meaning and allow the player to explore/configure discourse about the past). The benefit of this is that we do not just gain knowledge of a particular historical representation but instead, conclusions about form (a particular game-structure’s operations) are then transferable to an understanding of games made up of similar ludic (and audio-visual) elements.
If a cautionary tale about the problems with privileging content over form is needed, then we can turn to the example of historical film, a form that has often been rejected on the basis of individual texts historical content. Critiques of particular historical films were assumed to be indicative of some kind of structural inability of film as a mode of historical expression. Many scholars concluded that film could not constitute ‘proper history’. It took a number of theorists (particularly the seminal work of Robert A. Rosenstone) to outline that accusations of ‘poor information loads’ or ‘discursive weakness’, were not only often unjustified and selective, but based on unfair comparisons. Not, as it might first seem, to the elusive past itself, but to the history found in books. This is an, often unconscious, ontological discrepancy whereby the notion of ‘accuracy’ or ‘truth’ is collapsed with and thus, taken to mean ‘in alignment with the narratives of book-history’.
Obviously the aim of the developers of historical videogames like Civilization or Brother’s in Arms (as well as to create entertaining games),is not to create history as it can be represented in a book but as it can be represented in a videogame. Analysis on the basis of content alone, almost invariably involves comparisons with historical narratives constructed and received in book form, which is often troublingly understood as the only form capable of producing ‘proper’ history. Most often these narratives are used as the benchmark for establishing truth or accuracy and thus, the examination of content. Such comparisons are also based on a confusion between the evidence of the past and the history that is written about it. The evidence of the past is often unavailable for reconsideration and rarely stands independent of (most often, narrative) interpretation and as such, these written interpretations are taken to be history (or more accurately, the past) itself, rather than history as it can be written, which naturally cannot be bluntly compared to history as it can be played. As Rosenstone (2006) repeatedly outlines, expecting history on film to be that of the book, merely transposed to an inferior form, is intensely problematic. Instead, history on film must be considered on its own terms. Aware of this type of flawed analysis, we are now presented with an opportunity to avoid the same mistakes that were made in the consideration of historical film. We can only do this by approaching historical videogames on their own terms and this can only be achieved by beginning to build an understanding that privileges transferable understandings of form over fixed analysis of individual historical content.
Games will likely never produce the same opportunities for discourse as a book, but then why should they? Analysis on the basis of content usually involve uncomfortable comparisons of this kind and can result in mistaken conclusions about the representational capability of the videogame as an historical form, rather than the limitations of and concerns surrounding, histories which can be interpreted as ‘popular’ or ‘commercial’. Each form utilizes different structures that, considered alongside one another as part of a larger trans-media meta-discourse, create much more interesting collaborative opportunities for establishing historical understanding than one or the other alone.
Examining only content also necessarily involves asking questions about what is included or left out of a particular videogames representation. This is rarely a useful question beyond the basis of a general common sense. Historical videogames are, like all histories, mimetic cultural products. Naturally, this involves a productive and often creative, process of evidence selection and emplotment. Thus, as Carr notes, ‘criticising a simulation for being reductive is nonsensical… [endnote]… That would be like disparaging a map for not being life-size’ (Carr 2007, 234 & endnote 6). Selectivity and reductionism is a natural ‘flaw’ of history (and all representation). This is no different in those histories that are written in books. This point becomes even more explicit when we consider ‘simulation…is perhaps the best translation of the Greek mimesis’ (Genette 1983, 15).
Analysis on the basis of content using a comparative method such as this often does not even produce particularly useful results. We can of course sometimes confidently highlight obvious anachronisms and misplaced objects but historical videogames mostly relinquish the telling of the experiences of specific historical agents and, favour instead typical historical environments, scenarios and experiences
. Given this, in the majority of cases (particularly given the implied audience), how much is to be actually gained by knowing, for instance, that certain shoes were not genuinely available until the 1490’s rather than the 1470’s, or that a particular character, though historically typical, did not truly exist? Relatively little, compared to the ‘feel’ of a period, the life, colour, action and processes (with which the book can struggle) and which can be easily communicated in games. More than this, in games we can wilfully discover these things, often as an (inter)active part of them, configuring our experience. It is only by focusing on form that we can understand how the game can produce meaning in these, arguably, new ways, that neither book nor cinema can effectively utilize. Examination of a particular history has to involve an understanding of the form through which it operates as these aspects can never be seen to truly stand apart. History is not a ‘thing’ that can be understood as separate from the forms in which it is produced, received and argued.
Historical videogames must be understood on their own terms, yet, still without relinquishing our understanding of the basic tenets of historical theory as they universally apply to history as a practice within any form (e.g. history is referential and representational). Admittedly, striking the balance between these concerns can be challenging. Accepting this challenge means considering historical videogames on a quite different basis, that does not completely exclude analysis of content and yet seeks to understand how the nature and the meanings produced by this are wholly dependent on the form of the text in both production and reception. Such an approach is more trying in the sense that content cannot be evaluated on only its own terms. Returning to Salen and Zimmerman’s schemas, historical content in games is a concern that balances unnervingly between rules, play and culture
and as such can only be understood by understanding the structures of the game through which it is created and disseminated. It is only by understanding the interplays between form and content that we can really gain any comprehension of the (often troubling) category we know as history, which is always anchored within the mediums in which it is created and received.
Understanding this requires a new approach to historical videogames, one that involves analyzing the structures that produce meaning. Structures which create opportunities for players to negotiate meaning in the ways that we are familiar with from other more ‘passive’ media but also to actively configure their own historical experience. In short, this means continually returning to and refocusing on, the agency which the player wields and which allows a somewhat unique form of engagement with historical discourse. This also means understanding the aesthetics of historical description that are utilized in historical videogames. This almost always includes audio-visual design, semiotic structures with which we are (hopefully) somewhat familiar with from historical film. However, in the videogame, even this element largely depends on the rules of the game and the opportunities for player action that these create. A large part of the aesthetics of games such as Assassin’s Creed are actually algorithms, that though written logically are still subjective aesthetics that attempt to represent historical experience through producing signs to be read and responses to be acted upon. In short, in any historical videogame, the aesthetics of historical description also function at a ludic level, producing a form of ‘procedural rhetoric’ (Bogost 2007) that, depending on a particular games (or genres) structures can influence virtually all of the other historical signifiers through which the game produces meaning. Understanding of this can only be approached through a focus that privileges form rather than individual content.
Having identified combinations of these audio-visual-ludic structures, we can then approach other games that operate similarly with an understanding of what opportunities for historical meaning-making they are likely to offer. This is transferable knowledge that is likely to remain so, even when faced with the historical games of the near-future.
It is defining and understanding these structures and how they operate in games, including the whole raft of new aesthetics that this implies, which is the most important task facing historians or other scholars interested in historical videogames. When we look at one game’s content, we understand no more than that. If analysis of content is necessary, then surely it is better left to those scholars that specialize in the historical period that the game tries to represent? However, as scholars that wish to study historical videogames then our first concern must be the form that exerts influence over virtually every aspect of production and reception. And which, in its relation to the historian/developer’s choices, decides the content. When we look at the videogame form in this way we can, I hope, begin to create a cohesive understanding of how games represent the past and what structures create particular opportunities for players to explore, understand and interact with these representations.
Of course advocating an approach and demonstrating it are different matters and as such my next post will be an analysis of the Assassin’s Creed seriesthat I hope displays that this focus on different concerns can take us back to the basics of what the game achieves or offers and accordingly, help us to think about the game in new ways.
This approach is far from complete and I make this call in a collaborative spirit. If taken up, this will no doubt become a complex analytical approach to construct but one which will benefit our understanding of this new form of historical expression. I also realise that this post is probably in many regards ‘preaching to the converted’ and many of the excellent pieces on this site display an understanding of the importance of analysing the structures at play within videogames if we are to understand the medium as a historical form and therefore, games as history at all. In a sense, this call to privilege form over content is also a simple point. However, I do believe that it is one worth making explicitly if we are to further develop a cohesive approach to historical videogames. Here at the relatively early point in the mediums life we are well placed to together offer the beginnings of an understanding of how and what, videogames enable in terms of playfully engaging, configuring and experiencing, discourse about the past.
References
Bogost, I. 2007. Persuasive games. Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Carr, D. 2007. The Trouble with Civilization. In Videogame//player/text, ed. T. Krzywinska and B. Atkins. 222-236. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Firaxis Games. 2010. Sid Meier’s Civilization V. 2K Games.
Gearbox Software. 2008. Brothers in Arms: Hell’s Highway. Ubisoft.
Genette, G. 1990 [1983]. Narrative discourse revisited, trans. J.E. Lewin. New York: Cornell University Press.
Rosenstone, R. 2006. History on Film/ Film on History. London: Pearson.
Salen, K & Zimmerman, E. 2004. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Ubisoft Montreal. 2011. Assassin’s Creed: Revelations. Ubisoft.
[Flickr Image courtesy of Man of Wax / Creative Commons Licensed]
Collaboratively edited and authored, Play the Past is dedicated to thoughtfully exploring and discussing the intersection of cultural heritage (very broadly defined) and games/meaningful play (equally broadly defined). Play the Past contributors come from a wide variety of backgrounds, domains, perspectives, and motivations (for being interested in both games and cultural heritage) – a fact which is evident in the wide variety of topics we tackle in our posts.
It is very important to note that Play the Past isn’t just about the intersection of cultural heritage and digital games, its also about non-digital games (boardgames, tabletop games, collectible card games, etc.), alternate reality games (ARGs), barely games (a term originally coined by Russel Davies – no, not the Doctor Who Russel Davies – and built upon by our very own Rob McDougall), and playful mechanics (or “gamifying” as its been recently called).
We are also very interested in exploring the spectrum of approaches to games – from the more “philosophical” (as some might call it) games studies side of things, to the more practically applied serious games/meaningful play side of things (and just about everything betwixt and between).
Inspired by Profhacker
Credit where credit is due. One of the most important inspirations for Play the Past comes from directly ProfHacker. You can see the fingerprints of ProfHacker all over Play the Past. From the way we do business behind the scenes to our commenting and community policy (which is pretty much shamelessly lifted verbatim from ProfHacker). This is no great surprise as Ethan Watrall (Play the Past’s editor) was in the first batch of ProfHacker writers. In this regard, we are extremely grateful to ProfHacker – and particularly ProfHacker’s two Editors: George H. Williams (@georgeonline on Twitter) and Jason B. Jones (@jbj on Twitter).
Interested in Contributing?
Interested in contributing to Play the Past (either on a regular basis or as a “one shot” guest author)? We’d love to hear from you. Drop us a line here and tell us a little bit about yourself and how you might contribute.
We are committed to fostering an environment characterized by generosity, creativity, and (as corny as it might sound) kindness. Comments on this blog are an important part of creating that environment, and this comment policy aims to communicate our values to new readers and encourage comments that will build up the online community here.
Thoughtful comments (even when–and often especially if–disagreeing) are encouraged and appreciated.
No snark allowed (see David Denby on definition of snark). While snark certainly has its virtues, this blog provides a space for people to be inexperienced at something, or even wrong, to facilitate learning. That’s harder to do in the face of either persistent or “drive-by” snark.
Play the Past should be a community built through regular contributions made by recognized–but not necessarily “real name”–contributors. Some commenters’ identities reveal their real names; other commenters use pseudonyms. Our online identities are built from our comments here and our presence–as commenters and authors–in other places on the web, in print, at conferences. Play the Past welcomes commenters–whether anonymous, psuedonymous, or publically identified–who are committed to creating a rich and respectful dialogue. We want commenters to be able to explore the complexities of Play the Past posts; we want commenters to inquire and debate; we want everyone to be able to learn from the conversation.
Links & images are encouraged. Gratuitous linking back to your own site is discouraged. Links in the “website” field should point only to profile pages or to personal websites.
Gravatars are strongly encouraged.
Jeremy Antley
Jeremy Antley is a writer/student/gamer who received his MA in History with a focus on the Russian Imperial period from the University of Kansas in 2007. While currently in the middle of researching the immigration of Russian Old Believers to Oregon in the mid-60′s for his doctoral ambitions, Jeremy also finds studying the life and culture of Russian peasants to be a fascinating topic. He looks at topics of digital culture, games and, of course, Russian history at his blog, Peasant Muse. Those interested in hearing the twitter ramblings of someone crazy enough to love Russian peasants would do well to check-out Jeremy’s handle- @jsantley. Having played many epic games of Axis & Allies as an undergraduate, Jeremy now plays a variety of board and console (xbox 360) games with his friends in his current residence of Portland, Oregon. Jeremy’s love of board games informs his current interest in how players modify their games and how looking at board games as platforms can inform historical inquiries.
Kevin Ballestrini
Kevin Ballestrini teaches Latin and Mythology at the Norwich Free Academy in Connecticut. He has received an M.A. and B.A. in Classics from the University of Colorado and University of Connecticut respectively. In addition to experience teaching in a traditional classroom setting, Kevin is deploying the first fully practomimetic introductory language course at the high school level this year in a section of Latin I. He hopes that the experience will enhance student engagement and connection to life and culture in ancient Rome. As an avid technology enthusiast, he maintains his blog, Techna Virumque Cano (http://kevinbal.blogspot.com) where he discusses the intersection of technology and his teaching. Kevin is also the leader of a Lord of the Rings Online kinship and has a great interest in exploring how games contribute to the development of (online) communities just as the bardic tradition contributed to the development of ancient communities. You can also find Kevin on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/kballestrini.
Emily Joy Bembeneck
Emily Bembeneck is a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Michigan in the Department of Classical Studies. She primarily works on narrative and character development in ancient epic and modern video games, both graphical and text-based. Other interests of hers include the image of the hero, Greek tragedy and social catharsis, cultural and individual identity through play, immersion, and game design, She teaches classes in Latin, Greek and Roman history, ancient war and entertainment, among other things related to the Classical world She is an active contributor at http://www.greywardens.com where she writes on the narrative structure of Bioware’s Dragon Age RPG franchise. Her current projects include working on images of Rome in ancient and modern culture, developing a Flash-based application that combines components of social play with narrative creation, and designing a Dragon Age module that explores Euripides’ Medea through post-primary narrative. When not being all academic and studious, she is likely either playing an elf in some virtual world or spending time with her two young sons. Find her online at Ada Play and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/adarel.
Andrew D. Devenney
Andrew D. Devenney is currently a Visiting Assistant Professor of World History at Grand Valley State University in Allendale, Michigan. A life-long and avid gamer of both video and role-playing games, Andrew has found elements of game-based learning, new media, and the digital humanities unconsciously seeping into his classroom over the last few years. As such, he has begun to experiment relentlessly on his students with these new ideas, techniques, and shiny toys, and is having a grand time doing it. Sometime in the relatively near future, Andrew hopes to deploy a new course that will explore global history through the medium of gaming (which means the class may very well morph into a giant, heavily modded, credit-based game of Dungeons and Dragons). Andrew can be found online at http://andrewdevenney.net and on Twitter as @adevenney.
Shawn Graham
Shawn Graham is Assistant Professor of Digital Humanities in the Department of History at Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada. He’s been blogging as ‘The Electric Archaeologist‘ since 2007, documenting his interest & experiments in game-based learning, agent based modeling, and other aspects of digital media for archaeological teaching and research. On Twitter, he’s at http://www.twitter.com/electricarchaeo. He’s published amongst other things a number of agent-based simulations on aspects of the Roman world, and has explored using Civilization mods in his distance-education classrooms. He received his PhD in Archaeology from the University of Reading in 2002, where he was interested in complexity & evolving networks in antiquity (especially in Rome). When he’s not geeking out over the latest tech toys or things archaeological, he is chief cider maker at Coronation Hall Cider Mills and playing Wii games with his family. If only there was wiiCivilization…
Matthew Kirschenbaum
Matthew Kirschenbaum is Associate Professor in the Department of English at the University of Maryland, Associate Director of the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH, an applied thinktank for the digital humanities), and Director of Digital Cultures and Creativity, a new “living/learning” program in the Honors College. Kirschenbaum speaks and writes often on topics in the digital humanities and new media; his work has received coverage in the Atlantic, New York Times, National Public Radio, Wired, Boing Boing, Slashdot, and the Chronicle of Higher Education. He has been pushing cardboard counters around on hexagonal grids since his early teens. See http://www.mkirschenbaum.net for more.
Katy Meyers
Katy Meyers is a graduate student in the Department of Anthropology,with a concentration in mortuary archaeology, at Michigan StateUniversity. She is currently a fellow in both the Cultural Heritage Informatics Initiative and the Campus Archaeology Program. She is also an editor of GradHacker, and the game designer for an Ancient Egyptbased mod of Civilization V. When she somehow finds free time she loves playing first person shooter and adventure video games, and is amajor fan of Milton-Bradley board game classics. She’s interested inthe role of games for outreach and education in archaeology and cultural heritage, as well as the biases they create. Katy can befound online at her blog http://www.bonesdontlie.com and on Twitter at @bonesdonotlie.
Jeremiah McCall
Jeremiah McCall has been teaching high school history for the past decade, mostly at Cincinnati Country Day School. His first professional love is high school teaching, especially designing instructional strategies that will engage and challenge his students to learn and grow. In addition to more conventional courses, Jeremiah also teaches senior elective on (tabletop) historical simulation design, and the intersection of serious games and contemporary global issues. Jeremiah’s primary training is in history with a PhD in ancient history from Ohio State University; he authored a book on the cavalry of the Roman Republic and is currently writing a historical biography of the Roman aristocrat M. Claudius Marcellus to be published by Pen and Sword press. He has recently completed a guidebook for teachers who wish to use simulation games in the history class. Titled Gaming the Past: Using Video Games to Teach Secondary History, the book was published by Routledge in June, 2011. As an extension of his teaching philosophy — that history is primarily the study and evaluation of competing interpretations of the past — McCall has conducted numerous classroom implementations of historical simulations as historical interpretations. He maintains the website gamingthepast.net, one of the primary sites devoted to the use of historical simulations in classroom teaching. He also plays far more video games — particularly RPGs and strategy — than you’d think he could find time for.
Rob MacDougall
Rob MacDougall is Assistant Professor of History at the University of Western Ontario and Associate Director of UWO’s Centre for American Studies, where he teaches United States history, the history of technology, and digital history methods. His research centers on the history of communication–he has just written a book on the early days of the telephone and is beginning a new book on the circulation of bad ideas. He blogs sporadically at Old is the New New and is on the Twitter at http://twitter.com/robotnik. A life-long gamer, Rob is interested in the history of gaming and in using games and play to encourage more playful historical thinking. His own play is largely non-digital of late–tabletop RPGs with his gamer buddies and make-believe with his kids–but he looks forward to seeing how good computer games will have gotten by the time he gets tenure.
Rebecca Mir
Rebecca Mir is a museum educator, researcher, and writer at various institutions in New York City. She will receive an M.A. in Decorative Arts, Design History, and Material Culture from the Bard Graduate Center in May 2012. She received her Bachelor’s degree in Art History from Indiana University of Pennsylvania in 2010. She often thinks about how (and why) artifacts and cultures are (mis)represented in video games and how museums are using games to engage and educate audiences. Rebecca can be found on Twitter as @hellenophile.
Trevor Owens
Trevor Owens is a digital archivist with the National Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program (NDIIP) at the Library of Congress and a doctoral student in the Graduate School of Education at George Mason University. Before joining the Library of Congress he worked as the community lead for the Zotero project at the Center for History and New Media helped organize the first two meetings of the Games, Learning, and Society Conference. He received a bachelors degree in the history of science form the University of Wisconsin, and a masters degree in American History with and emphasis on digital history from George Mason University. Trevor has spent considerable amounts of time playing all iterations of Civilization, but is also a big fan of role playing games (everything from Earthbound to Fallout). Trevor has published on the history of children’s books about Einstein and Curie, the discursive practices of Civ Modders, and the role of digital research tools in scholarship and teaching. When not researching, writing, or gaming, he also enjoys playing the violin. Trevor can be found online at http://www.trevorowens.org and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/tjowens
Roger Travis
Roger Travis is an Associate Professor of Classics in the Department of Literatures, Cultures & Languages of the University of Connecticut. He is also the Director of the Video Games and Human Values Initiative at UConn, an interdisciplinary online nexus for scholarly activities like monthly symposia and “playversations.” He received his Bachelor’s degree in classics from Harvard College, and his Ph.D. in comparative literature from the University of California, Berkeley before arriving at UConn in 1997. He has published on Homeric epic, Greek tragedy, Greek historiography, the 19th C. British novel, HALO, and the massively-multiplayer online role-playing game He has been President of the Classical Association of New England and of the Classical Association of Connecticut. He writes the blog Living Epic about the fundamental connection between ancient epic and the narrative video game, and is a founder and contributor of the collaborative blog Play the Past. In the 2009-2010 academic year, Roger offered the first courses ever designed entirely as practomimes.
Mark Sample
Mark Sample is an Assistant Professor of contemporary literature and new media studies in the Department of English at George Mason University. In addition to his work on electronic literature, videogames, and code studies, Mark is an outspoken advocate of open source pedagogy and open source research. In recognition of his commitment to innovation in teaching, Mark was the recipient of George Mason’s 2010 Teaching Excellence Award. Mark is a regular contributor to ProfHacker, and can also be found online at samplereality.com or on Twitter as @samplereality.
Ethan Watrall
Ethan Watrall is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Anthropology and Associate Director of Matrix:The Center for Humane Arts, Letters & Social Sciences Online at Michigan State University. In addition, Ethan is a Principal Investigator in the Games for Entertainment & Learning Lab, and co- founder of both the undergraduate Specialization and Game Design Development and the MA in Serious Game Design at Michigan State University. Ethan teaches (and has taught) in a wide variety of areas including cultural heritage informatics, ancient Egyptian social history & archaeology, archaeology and pop culture, user centered & user experience design, game design, serious game design, game studies. and history of various forms of popular and entertainment media (comics and digital games to name a few). When he’s not being all professorial, he’s a world class comic book nerd (Killowog is so his favorite Green Lantern), a sci-fi dork (he’ll argue to the grave that Tom Baker is the best Doctor ever), and an avid player of all sorts of games (digital, board, and tabletop). Ethan can be found online at http://www.captainprimate.com, and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/captain_primate