With the newly developed enthusiasm for RDF as the basis for library bibliographic data we are seeing a number of efforts to transform library data into this modern, web-friendly format. This is a positive development in many ways, but we need to be careful to make this transition cleanly without bringing along baggage from our past.
Recent efforts have focused on translating library record formats into RDF with the result that we now have:
 ISBD in RDF
 FRBR in RDF
 RDA in RDF
and will soon have
 MODS in RDF
In addition there are various applications that convert MARC21 to RDF, although none is "official." That is, none has been endorsed by an appropriate standards body.
Each of these efforts takes a single library standard and, using RDF as its underlying technology, creates a full metadata schema that defines each element of the standard in RDF. The result is that we now have a series of RDF silos, each defining data elements as if they belong uniquely to that standard. We have, for example, at least four different declarations of "place of publication": in ISBD, RDA, FRBR and MODS, each with its own URI. There are some differences between them (e.g. RDA separates place of publication, manufacture, production while ISBD does not) but clearly they should descend from a common ancestor:
 RDA: place of publication
RDA: place of distribution
RDA: place of manufacture
FRBRer: has place of publication or distribution
ISBD: has place of publication, production, distribution This would be annoying, but not unworkable, if these different instances of "place of publication" could be treated as having some meaning in common such that one could link a FRBRer element to an ISBD element, but they cannot. The reason they cannot is that each of these constrains the elements in a particular way that defines its relationship to a single data context (what we generally think of as a "record structure"). The elements are not independent of that context, and this means that each can only be used within that particular context. This is the antithesis of the linked data concept, where data sets from diverse sources share metadata elements. It is this re-use of elements that creates the "link" in linked data. To achieve this, metadata elements need to be unconstrained by a particular context.
Linking can also be achieved through vertical relationships, similar to "broader" and "narrower" in thesauri. This is less direct, but makes it possible to mix data sets that have differing levels of granularity. In our case, the ISBD "place of publication, production, distribution" could be defined as broader to the three RDA elements that treat those separately. Unfortunately that is not possible because of the way that ISBD and RDA have been defined in RDF. (I'll post more detail about this later for those who want more.)
The result is that we now have a series of RDF silos, expressions of our data in RDF that lack the linking capabilities of linked data because they are bound to specific data structures. Clearly we gain little in terms of linked data by creating mutually incompatible bibliographic views. Not only are these RDF schemes not compatible with each other, none will be linkable to bibliographic data from communities outside of libraries who published their data on the Web. That means no linking to Amazon, to Wikipedia, to citations within documents.
Given where we are in the development of linked data for libraries, we now have two options:
1) Define 'super-elements' that float above the record formats and that are not bound by the constraints of the RDF-defined records. In this case there would be a general "place of publication" that is super- to all of the "place of publication" elements in the various records, and would be subordinate to a general concept of "place" that is widely used (possibly a property of GeoNames). To implement linking, each record element would be extrapolated to its super elements.
2) Define our data elements outside of any particular record format first, then use these in the record schemas. In this case there would be only one instance of "place of publication" and it would be used throughout the various bibliographic records whenever an element with that meaning is needed. Those records would be interchangeable as linked data using their component data elements, and would interact with other bibliographic data on the Web using the RDF-defined elements and their relationships.
My message here is that we need to be creating data, not records, and that we need to create the data first, then build records with it for those applications where records are needed. Those records will operate internally to library systems, while the data has the potential to make connections in linked data space. I would also suggest that we cease creating silo'd RDF record formats, as these will not move us forward. Instead, we should concentrate on discovering and defining the elements of our data, and begin looking outward at all of the data we want to link to in the vast information universe.
 _____
 * Note on RDA: RDA in RDF includes two "versions" of each data element: one bound to FRBR and one not. The latter has potential for re-use outside of a FRBR environment, and was designed for this purpose by the DCMI/RDA task force. Its relationship to "official" RDA is somewhat unclear at this time but hopefully will gain support as the linked data concept is absorbed into the bibliographic framework.