According to Google Scholar, David Blei’s first topic modeling paper has received 3,540 citations since 2003. Everybody’s talking about topic models. Seriously, I’m afraid of visiting my parents this Hanukkah and hearing them ask “Scott… what’s this topic modeling I keep hearing all about?” They’re powerful, widely applicable, easy to use, and difficult to understand — a dangerous combination.
Since shortly after Blei’s first publication, researchers have been looking into the interplay between networks and topic models. This post will be about that interplay, looking at how they’ve been combined, what sorts of research those combinations can drive, and a few pitfalls to watch out for. I’ll bracket the big elephant in the room until a later discussion, whether these sorts of models capture the semantic meaning for which they’re often used. This post also attempts to introduce topic modeling to those not yet fully converted aware of its potential.
Citations to Blei (2003) from ISI Web of Science. There are even two citations already from 2012; where can I get my time machine?
In my recent post on IU’s awesome alchemy project, I briefly mentioned Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) and Latent Dirichlit Allocation (LDA) during the discussion of topic models. They’re intimately related, though LSA has been around for quite a bit longer. Without getting into too much technical detail, we should start with a brief history of LSA/LDA.
The story starts, more or less, with a tf-idf matrix. Basically, tf-idf ranks words based on how important they are to a document within a larger corpus. Let’s say we want a list of the most important words for each article in an encyclopedia.
Our first pass is obvious. For each article, just attach a list of words sorted by how frequently they’re used. The problem with this is immediately obvious to anyone who has looked at word frequencies; the top words in the entry on the History of Computing would be “the,” “and,” “is,” and so forth, rather than “turing,” “computer,” “machines,” etc. The problem is solved by tf-idf, which scores the words based on how special they are to a particular document within the larger corpus. Turing is rarely used elsewhere, but used exceptionally frequently in our computer history article, so it bubbles up to the top.
LSA and pLSA
LSA utilizes these tf-idf scores  within a larger term-document matrix. Every word in the corpus is a different row in the matrix, each document has its own column, and the tf-idf score lies at the intersection of every document and word. Our computing history document will probably have a lot of zeroes next to words like “cow,” “shakespeare,” and “saucer,” and high marks next to words like “computation,” “artificial,” and “digital.” This is called a sparse matrix because it’s mostly filled with zeroes; most documents use very few words related to the entire corpus.
With this matrix, LSA uses singular value decomposition to figure out how each word is related to every other word. Basically, the more often words are used together within a document, the more related they are to one another.  It’s worth noting that a “document” is defined somewhat flexibly. For example, we can call every paragraph in a book its own “document,” and run LSA over the individual paragraphs.
To get an idea of the sort of fantastic outputs you can get with LSA, do check out the implementation over at The Chymistry of Isaac Newton.
Newton Project LSA
The method was significantly improved by Puzicha and Hofmann (1999), who did away with the linear algebra approach of LSA in favor of a more statistically sound probabilistic model, called probabilistic latent semantic analysis (pLSA). Now is the part of the blog post where I start getting hand-wavy, because explaining the math is more trouble than I care to take on in this introduction.
Essentially, pLSA imagines an additional layer between words and documents: topics. What if every document isn’t just a set of words, but a set of topics? In this model, our encyclopedia article about computing history might be drawn from several topics. It primarily draws from the big platonic computing topic in the sky, but it also draws from the topics of history, cryptography, lambda calculus, and all sorts of other topics to a greater or lesser degree.
Now, these topics don’t actually exist anywhere. Nobody sat down with the encyclopedia, read every entry, and decided to come up with the 200 topics from which every article draws. pLSA infers topics based on what will hereafter be referred to as black magic. Using the dark arts, pLSA “discovers” a bunch of topics, attaches them to a list of words, and classifies the documents based on those topics.
LDA
Blei et al. (2003) vastly improved upon this idea by turning it into a generative model of documents, calling the model Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA). By this time, as well, some sounder assumptions were being made about the distribution of words and document length — but we won’t get into that. What’s important here is the generative model.
Imagine you wanted to write a new encyclopedia entry, let’s say about digital humanities. Well, we now know there are three elements that make up that process, right? Words, topics, and documents. Using these elements, how would you go about writing this new article on digital humanities?
First off, let’s figure out what topics our article will consist of. It probably draws heavily from topics about history, digitization, text analysis, and so forth. It also probably draws more weakly from a slew of other topics, concerning interdisciplinarity, the academy, and all sorts of other subjects. Let’s go a bit further and assign weights to these topics; 22% of the document will be about digitization, 19% about history, 5% about the academy, and so on. Okay, the first step is done!
Now it’s time to pull out the topics and start writing. It’s an easy process; each topic is a bag filled with words. Lots of words. All sorts of words. Let’s look in the “digitization” topic bag. It includes words like “israel” and “cheese” and “favoritism,” but they only appear once or twice, and mostly by accident. More importantly, the bag also contains 157 appearances of the word “TEI,” 210 of “OCR,” and 73 of “scanner.”
LDA Model from Blei (2011)
So here you are, you’ve dragged out your digitization bag and your history bag and your academy bag and all sorts of other bags as well. You start writing the digital humanities article by reaching into the digitization bag (remember, you’re going to reach into that bag for 22% of your words), and you pull out “OCR.” You put it on the page. You then reach for the academy bag and reach for a word in there (it happens to be “teaching,”) and you throw that on the page as well. Keep doing that. By the end, you’ve got a document that’s all about the digital humanities. It’s beautiful. Send it in for publication.
Alright, what now?
So why is the generative nature of the model so important? One of the key reasons is the ability to work backwards. If I can generate an (admittedly nonsensical) document using this model, I can also reverse the process an infer, given any new document and a topic model I’ve already generated, what the topics are that the new document draws from.
Another factor contributing to the success of LDA is the ability to extend the model. In this case, we assume there are only documents, topics, and words, but we could also make a model that assumes authors who like particular topics, or assumes that certain documents are influenced by previous documents, or that topics change over time. The possibilities are endless, as evidenced by the absurd number of topic modeling variations that have appeared in the past decade. David Mimno has compiled a wonderful bibliography of many such models.
While the generative model introduced by Blei might seem simplistic, it has been shown to be extremely powerful. When a newcomer sees the results of LDA for the first time, they are immediately taken by how intuitive they seem. People sometimes ask me “but didn’t it take forever to sit down and make all the topics?” thinking that some of the magic had to be done by hand. It wasn’t. Topic modeling yields intuitive results, generating what really feels like topics as we know them , with virtually no effort on the human side. Perhaps it is the intuitive utility that appeals so much to humanists.
Topic models can interact with networks in multiple ways. While a lot of the recent interest in digital humanities has surrounded using networks to visualize how documents or topics relate to one another, the interfacing of networks and topic modeling initially worked in the other direction. Instead of inferring networks from topic models, many early (and recent) papers attempt to infer topic models from networks.
Topic Models from Networks
The first research I’m aware of in this niche was from McCallum et al. (2005). Their model is itself an extension of an earlier LDA-based model called the Author-Topic Model (Steyvers et al., 2004), which assumes topics are formed based on the mixtures of authors writing a paper. McCallum et al. extended that model for directed messages in their Author-Recipient-Topic (ART) Model. In ART, it is assumed that topics of letters, e-mails or direct messages between people can be inferred from knowledge of both the author and the recipient. Thus, ART takes into account the social structure of a communication network in order to generate topics. In a later paper (McCallum et al., 2007), they extend this model to one that infers the roles of authors within the social network.
Dietz et al. (2007) created a model that looks at citation networks, where documents are generated by topical innovation and topical inheritance via citations. Nallapati et al. (2008) similarly creates a model that finds topical similarity in citing and cited documents, with the added ability of being able to predict citations that are not present. Blei himself joined the fray in 2009, creating the Relational Topic Model (RTM) with Jonathan Chang, which itself could summarize a network of documents, predict links between them, and predict words within them. Wang et al. (2011) created a model that allows for “the joint analysis of text and links between [people] in a time-evolving social network.” Their model is able to handle situations where links exist even when there is no similarity between the associated texts.
Networks from Topic Models
Some models have been made that infer networks from non-networked text. Broniatowski and Magee (2010 & 2011) extended the Author-Topic Model, building a model that would infer social networks from meeting transcripts. They later added temporal information, which allowed them to infer status hierarchies and individual influence within those social networks.
Many times, however, rather than creating new models, researchers create networks out of topic models that have already been run over a set of data. There are a lot of benefits to this approach, as exemplified by the Newton’s Chymistry project highlighted earlier. Using networks, we can see how documents relate to one another, how they relate to topics, how topics are related to each other, and how all of those are related to words.
Elijah Meeks created a wonderful example combining topic models with networks in Comprehending the Digital Humanities. Using fifty texts that discuss humanities computing, Elijah created a topic model of those documents and used networks to show how documents, topics, and words interacted with one another within the context of the digital humanities.
Network generated by Elijah Meeks to show how digital humanities documents relate to one another via the topics they share.
Elijah Jeff Drouin has also created networks of topic models in Proust, as reported by Elijah.
Peter Leonard recently directed me to TopicNets, a project that combines topic modeling and network analysis in order to create an intuitive and informative navigation interface for documents and topics. This is a great example of an interface that turns topic modeling into a useful scholarly tool, even for those who know little-to-nothing about networks or topic models.
If you want to do something like this yourself, Shawn Graham recently posted a great tutorial on how to create networks using MALLET and Gephi quickly and easily. Prepare your corpus of text, get topics with MALLET, prune the CSV, make a network, visualize it! Easy as pie.
Networks can be a great way to represent topic models. Beyond simple uses of navigation and relatedness as were just displayed, combining the two will put the whole battalion of network analysis tools at the researcher’s disposal. We can use them to find communities of similar documents, pinpoint those documents that were most influential to the rest, or perform any of a number of other workflows designed for network analysis.
As with anything, however, there are a few setbacks. Topic models are rich with data. Every document is related to every other document, if some only barely. Similarly, every topic is related to every other topic. By deciding to represent document similarity over a network, you must make the decision of precisely how similar you want a set of documents to be if they are to be linked. Having a network with every document connected to every other document is scarcely useful, so generally we’ll make our decision such that each document is linked to only a handful of others. This allows for easier visualization and analysis, but it also destroys much of the rich data that went into the topic model to begin with. This information can be more fully preserved using other techniques, such as multidimensional scaling.
A somewhat more theoretical complication makes these network representations useful as a tool for navigation, discovery, and exploration, but not necessarily as evidentiary support. Creating a network of a topic model of a set of documents piles on abstractions. Each of these systems comes with very different assumptions, and it is unclear what complications arise when combining these methods ad hoc.
Although there may be issues with the process, the combination of topic models and networks is sure to yield much fruitful research in the digital humanities. There are some fantastic tutorials out there for getting started with topic modeling in the humanities, such as Shawn Graham’s post on Getting Started with MALLET and Topic Modeling, as well as on combining them with networks, such as this post from the same blog. Shawn is right to point out MALLET, a great tool for starting out, but you can also find the code used for various models on many of the model-makers’ academic websites. One code package that stands out is Chang’s implementation of LDA and related models in R.
Blei, D. M. (2011). Introduction to Probabilistic Topic Models. Communications of the ACM.
Blei, D. M., & Lafferty, J. D. (2006). Dynamic topic models. Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, ICML ’06 (pp. 113–120). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1143844.1143859
Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the ACM, 55(4), 77. doi:10.1145/2133806.2133826
Boyd-Graber, J., & Blei, D. M. (2009). Multilingual topic models for unaligned text. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI ’09 (pp. 75–82). Arlington, Virginia, United States: AUAI Press. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1795114.1795124
Broniatowski, D. A., & Magee, C. L. (2010). Analysis of Social Dynamics on FDA Panels Using Social Networks Extracted from Meeting Transcripts. 2010 IEEE Second International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom) (pp. 329–334). Presented at the 2010 IEEE Second International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom), IEEE. doi:10.1109/SocialCom.2010.54
AlSumait, L., Barbará, D., Gentle, J., & Domeniconi, C. (2009). Topic Significance Ranking of LDA Generative Models. In W. Buntine, M. Grobelnik, D. Mladenić, & J. Shawe-Taylor (Eds.), Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases (Vol. 5781, pp. 67–82). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Retrieved from http://www.springerlink.com/content/v3jth868647716kg/
Chaney, A. J. B., & Blei, D. M. (2012). Visualizing Topic Models. Presented at the Internatoinal AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Dublin, Ireland.
Chang, J., & Blei, D. M. (2010). Hierarchical relational models for document networks. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 4(1), 124–150. doi:10.1214/09-AOAS309
Dietz, L., Bickel, S., & Scheffer, T. (2007). Unsupervised prediction of citation influences. Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, ICML ’07 (pp. 233–240). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1273496.1273526
Erosheva, E., Fienberg, S. E., & Lafferty, J. D. (2004). Mixed-membership models of scientific publications. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101, 5220–5227. doi:10.1073/pnas.0307760101
Gardner, M. J., Lutes, J., Lund, J., Hansen, J., Walker, D., Ringger, E., & Seppi, K. (2010). The Topic Browser: An Interactive Tool for Browsing Topic Models. Presented at the NIPS Workshop on Challenges of Data Visualization.
Gerrish, S., & Blei, D. M. (2009). Modeling Influence in Text Corpora. Presented at the NIPS Workshop on Applications for Topic Models: Text and Beyond., Whistler, Canada.
Gerrish, S., & Blei, D. M. (2010). A language-based approach to measuring scholarly impact. Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Machine Learning. Presented at the International Conference on Machine Learning, Haifa, Israael. Retrieved from http://www.cs.princeton.edu/ blei/papers/GerrishBlei2010.pdf
Girolami, M., & Kabán, A. (2003). On an equivalence between PLSI and LDA. Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in informaion retrieval, SIGIR ’03 (pp. 433–434). Presented at the SIGIR ’03, New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/860435.860537
Gretarsson, B., O’Donovan, J., Bostandjiev, S., Hollerer, T., Asuncion, A., Newman, D., & Smyth, P. (2011). TopicNets: Visual Analysis of Large Text Corpora with Topic Modeling. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (Vol. 5, pp. 1–26).
Hall, D., Jurafsky, D., & Manning, C. D. (2008). Studying the history of ideas using topic models. Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’08 (pp. 363–371). Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1613715.1613763
McCallum, A., Wang, X., & Corrada-Emmanuel, A. (2007). Topic and role discovery in social networks with experiments on enron and academic email. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 30(1), 249–272. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1622637.1622644
McCallum, A., Corrada-Emmanuel, A., & Wang, X. (2005). Topic and role discovery in social networks. Proceedings of the 19th international joint conference on Artificial intelligence, IJCAI’05 (pp. 786–791). San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1642293.1642419
Mei, Q., Cai, D., Zhang, D., & Zhai, C. (2008). Topic modeling with network regularization. Proceeding of the 17th international conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’08 (pp. 101–110). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1367497.1367512
Mimno, D., & McCallum, A. (2007). Mining a digital library for influential authors. Proceedings of the 7th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital libraries, JCDL ’07 (pp. 105–106). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1255175.1255196
Nallapati, R. M., Ahmed, A., Xing, E. P., & Cohen, W. W. (2008). Joint latent topic models for text and citations. Proceeding of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD ’08 (pp. 542–550). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1401890.1401957
Rosen-Zvi, M., Griffiths, T., Steyvers, M., & Smyth, P. (2004). The author-topic model for authors and documents. Proceedings of the 20th conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, UAI ’04 (pp. 487–494). Arlington, Virginia, United States: AUAI Press. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1036843.1036902
Broniatowski, D. A., & Magee, C. L. (2011). Towards a Computational Analysis of Status and Leadership Styles on FDA Panels. In J. Salerno, S. J. Yang, D. Nau, & S.-K. Chai (Eds.), Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling and Prediction (Vol. 6589, pp. 212–218). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Retrieved from http://www.springerlink.com/content/w655v786lp583660/
Steyvers, M., & Griffiths, T. (2006). Probabilistic topic models. In T. Landauer, D. McNamara, S. Dennis, & W. Kintsch (Eds.), Latent Semantic Analysis: A Road to Meaning (Vol. 427, pp. 424–440).
Wang, E., Silva, J., Willett, R., & Carin, C. (2011). Dynamic relational topic model for social network analysis with noisy links. 2011 IEEE Statistical Signal Processing Workshop (SSP) (pp. 497–500). Presented at the 2011 IEEE Statistical Signal Processing Workshop (SSP), IEEE. doi:10.1109/SSP.2011.5967741
Welcome to the scottbot irregular. My name’s Scott, and the US Government has for some reason seen fit to give me money to study Science. It’s ‘Science’ with a capital ‘S’ because I’m not studying individual aspects of the world using science, but rather studying Science in general as a social, historical, philosophical, and intellectual phenomenon. What’s worse, I’m attempting to do it scientifically. This blog is my attempt at giving the country its money’s worth. Also, I kinda would love feedback on my eventual dissertation. See? Everybody wins.
scott b. weingart
is pretty clueless about a lot of things. This is his attempt to be less so.
I pledge to be a good scholarly citizen. This includes:
Opening all data generated by me for the purpose of a publication at the time of publication.
Opening all code generated by me for the purpose of a publication at the time of publication.
Freely distributing all published material for which I have the right, and fighting to retain those rights in situations where that is not the case.
Fighting for open access of all materials worked on as a co-author, participant in a grant, or consultant on a project.
I pledge to support open access by:
Only reviewing for journals which plan to release their publications openly.
Donating to free open source software initiatives where I would otherwise have paid for proprietary software.
Citing open publications if there is a choice between two otherwise equivalent sources.
I pledge never to let work get in the way of play.
I pledge to give people chocolate occasionally if I think they’re awesome.
_
[This is somewhat out of date. Please stand by for new information!]
Hello World!
Student of History & Philosophy of Science and Information Science at Indiana University.
You’ve managed to stumble across my little corner of the internet. I’m currently a student and researcher in the HPS and SLIS departments at IUB under two of the most interesting and capable professors I’ve had the fortune to meet: Colin Allen and Katy Börner. I studied history of science and computer engineering at UF, where I slaved researched for the infinitely patient Robert A. Hatch, who taught me more in four short years than I’d yet learned in aggregate over my entire life.
Early InPhO Concept Map
These days, I split my time between classes, the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO) and the Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science Center (CNS). At InPhO I program and design visual, navigable representations of our dynamically generated taxonomy of ideas; analyze relational networks (influenced, disagreed with, etc.) from our Thinkers database; and map and compare philosophical ontologies. The CNS keeps me busy with all sorts of scientometric analyses, and I am also involved in the development of large scale network analysis software such as the NWB, creating workflows, providing software feedback, writing documentation and teaching workshops.
Co-authorship network created using the Network Workbench Tool
Research
How do changes in communication structures and technologies affect scientific discourse and collaboration?
Science is totally rad. So I study it.
There are all sorts of ways to study science, of course, and you can’t leave out even one if you want to understand Science as a whole. That means taking a look at its philosophy, history, anthropology, culture and all sorts of other things as well (perhaps even sociology!). It also means looking at (gasp) the science itself, because no self-respecting scholar should claim to understand physics and physicists without being able to calculate the distance the bullet travels before it falls.
My overarching research is in modeling and mapping the growth of science on a large scale – thematically, geographically and temporally – hoping eventually to reveal what conditions yield the most rapid rate of discovery and innovation. Looking back, we see times when scientific progress lurches forward at alarming rates, times when studies come to a halt, times when great minds exposit to deaf ears. Sometimes the reasons are obvious: burned libraries, overthrown empires, new sources of funding, technological breakthroughs, wars that need to be won. But these are heavy brush-strokes painted across the canvas of history.
If we could somehow view the whole of scientific endeavors for the last thousand years, across every topic and in every city, with the same fine granularity used to research modern-day science, imagine how much we could learn. By zooming out and looking for “hot spots” of innovation in the history of science, and by understanding the environment in which these hot spots formed, we can learn how to induce those same ideal conditions in modern day research.
If the synthesis of new ideas in physics tends to come from young researchers working on their own and with backgrounds in other fields, funds can be allotted to make sure more of those exist. If medical innovations come fastest when small groups of experts collaborate, or if science in general runs smoother in small-world type collaborative networks rather than completely connected networks, that information can be used to focus funding in just the right way to improve the rate of innovation.
The closest we can come to that fine granularity, to understanding science across contexts, is by using as many research tools as we can find. We must be comfortable working in whatever discipline with whatever methodology is necessary to find the answers sought. Huge historical data sets will be a must. Scientometricians and others in related fields do an amazing job of learning the structure of modern science, but that structure is necessarily bound to the mediums it inhabits. Modern science is a beast of national laboratories, e-mails, universities, cited journals, click-throughs, conferences and page hits.
Marshall McLuhan may or may not have been correct when he claimed “the medium is the message,” but there is no doubt that the medium plays a large role in how science is adopted, disseminated and studied. That role cannot be understood without stepping back and viewing all of the alternatives – correspondences, scientific societies, book transcriptions, etc.
Dutch Republic of Letters created in collaboration with The Huygens Instituut
The task, then, is to collect as much data as possible, as far back as we can. We should track where books traveled within Medieval Europe and Asia; who corresponded with whom, how often, and about what during the Early Modern period; who taught whom and where scientists studied; how many books were published in what languages; what universities had copies of which journals; where shared resources traveled.
This is an impossible amount of data, of course, and can only exist if created collaboratively and in the spirit of openness. These are not ideas to be copyrighted – they are numbers and data points, and they should be accessible and compatible and aggregated in one place. A History of Science Data Commons, so to speak. More on that project coming soon.
Trying to understand all of it at once is a big task… and absolutely impossible.  I’ve sliced myself two pieces of the pie that are hopefully manageable and definitely inseparable:
Periods of rapid scientific production and progress.
Inflection points in scientific communication and collaboration.
Changes in communication structures and technologies obviously affect scientific progress deeply, and it is exactly what those effects are that I hope to uncover. Scientific revolutions and media revolutions, what a tired subject! Well, perhaps, but there are two very good reasons they’re overstudied: they’re terribly important, and nobody’s got them right yet.
Interests
Courtney and I contact juggling
Thankfully for my friends and family I do not work 24/7. When not working, I can often be found juggling, attending renaissance festivals, geocaching, camping, campaigning for rationality, and reading science fiction & fantasy novels. When I feel guilty about not working, but not enough to actually get back to work, I read about physics, cognitive science and linguistics. I am also perpetually writing a history of the obscure art of contact juggling.
Juggling has been a big part of my life for nearly a decade now; I was president of Objects in Motion (UF Juggling Club) for a few years and brought the club from 3 to 30 active members, taught lessons at Groovolution dance studio, and performed with Circle & Spice in Bloomington. I’m now involved in the IU Juggling Club and juggle irregularly at the Bloomington Farmer’s Market. I have performed as far north as Calgary, as far east as Amsterdam, as far west as Los Angeles, all the way south in Miami, and all sorts of places in between.
None of that would have been possible without my good friends and co-performers in the Spherocity contact juggling troupe: Matt, Jay, Cory, Courtney, Steve, and Leighanna. Thanks to Nick, Nicole, Leah, Ian and the rest of the crew, Objects in Motion keeps growing larger and better and I miss them terribly. And if you’re reading this, Sierra, you should start juggling again.
Juggling knives in Calgary
As if there’s not enough on my plate already, I’m also involved in two wonderful pseudo-academic organizations. I co-founded Sophosessions with Warren C. Moore, the coolest cat I know, in my junior year at UF. The group still meets a little more than monthly and allows its two-dozen members to present talks on whatever they feel like, from Chinese calligraphy to Zen Buddhism to advanced fractal mathematics to building robots. Then everyone goes to Ben & Jerry’s. I still webcast into meetings whenever I can, but it’s just not the same without the ice-cream.
The Venerable IU Beer & Algorithms Club fills two Monday nights a month, and I get to listen to a bunch of Computer Science and Math graduates present their favorite algorithms in gory detail, all while eating a tasty meal and enjoying an equally tasty beverage. What could be better?