Innovations in Digital Research: Challenges and Opportunities
 University of Nebraska
 Nebraska Digital Workshop
 October 14, 2011
(The following talk was given for the 6th Annual Nebraska Digital Workshop. I’m grateful to Kay Walter and Ken Price for the invitation to serve as a presenter at the workshop and to Susan Brown for participating on the panel, and to Kirsten Uszkalo, Jentery Sayers, and Colin Wilder for their participation in the workshop.)
I’m going to talk this afternoon about a central paradox of doing digital humanities–what Jerome Mcgann, one of the leading scholars of electronic texts, calls the problem of imagining what you don’t know.
In Digital Humanities, what we think we will build and what we build are often quite different, and unexpectedly so. It’s this radical disjuncture that offers us both opportunities and challenges.
As you just heard, my book from Yale came out in September. From the start I thought of the book and the digital project on Railroads and the Making of Modern America as complementary and inter-dependent. The web site was a publicly available platform for assembling research, integrating data, collaborating with other scholars, and experimenting with forms of argument and interpretation.
And about a week before the book came out, I received a phone call from someone named Harvey Rochman. Mr. Rochman is a film producer, saw the book listed on Yale’s web site and saw the link to the digital project, and he said he wanted to make a film of . . . The Iron Way.
I assured him that such an enterprise could not be undertaken for business purposes. Perhaps, this was some sort of elaborate tax shelter, or a front for something awful, like the illegal trade in exotic species, or maybe it was part of a charity program to benefit poor historians. He was calling from Florida–Key West–which was meant to impress me I think.
He said that oh yes he was serious, I could find him in IMDB, he produced a studio film in 2008 [(Misconceptions--about a religiously conservative Southern woman who agrees to be a surrogate mother for two gay men in Boston, one is African American, much confusion and comedy ensue, apparently).] He was working with someone whose name I did not immediately recognize, that means he had not been on Dancing with the Stars recently, no one famous like the guys from Duran Duran, Ally Sheedy, or Kirsty Alley, or someone like that. Anyway, he said in total seriousness that all I needed was 3 acts, 1 to set up the conflict, one to have the conflict, and last a resolution. Three acts. Simple. Let’s see. The Civil War, there’s conflict, but there’s that resolution part. Humm. Railroads, there conflict, conflict, conflict.
In any case, what I needed was a “treatment.” In this encounter with the producer, it was clear that everything could be reduced to “a treatment”. It was also clear as I stumbled to explain the digital project and the book–that we were worlds apart. I’d been to Key West but not his Key West. I could not translate the way the book and digital project worked together, the role the digital project played in shaping my argument.
More seriously, this interest, however unexpected, does indicate something we also often forget–we work on subjects of great appeal and audiences are enthusiastic and compelled by the stories we tell in history, art, literature, poetry.
It turns out that the digital project was my sub sub-library to borrow a phrase from Herman Melville and Moby-Dick. And the work of the sub sub-librarian was one of classification and interconnection–it required getting out in the world too, talking with other collectors and librarians. In a way it is a different scholarly identity.
This is a role that in the digital humanities we embrace as public not private–and reverses what had been the practice for generations of guarding your sources and research plans. Here’s a test: who checks that box at the Special Collections sign-in “Yes, I am willing to be contacted about my work”? This public role of collecting, sharing, and opening the sub sub library is one that I have found I cherished.
Even so, as Melville warned, the archive “however authentic” offers only “a glancing bird’s eye view of what has been promiscuously said, thought, fancied, and sung of Leviathan, by many nations and generations, including our own.”
There was a further problem with the idea of a film script. Much of what I was doing–spatial approaches to history and, even, network approaches to history–was about understanding process rather than explaining causation, it was about exploring the making of modern America. I wanted in the book to hold up a correlation I saw in the archive: between what had been separately told stories–the Civil War and the expansion of railroads. The goal in the book was to explore this correlation and to tell the story of these processes unfolding simultaneously.
In this view history is interactive not static, the digital project offers an immersive experience rather than a linear one, a way for readers to participate in the reading of history, in exploring the correlation I was seeing.
When we produce a work of scholarship in whatever form, Jerome Mcgann reminds us that “to make anything is also to make a speculative foray into a concealed but wished for unknown.” I assure you that what I wished for in setting out on my digital project was not to produce a movie with Mr. Rochman or any other equally famous director, though I have not ruled out such a venture. This is a guiding principle of DH: keep your options open for as long as possible.
So, the digital work that we create, Mcgann tells us, “is not the achievement of one’s desire: it is the shadow of that desire. . .”
I am particularly aware of Mcgann’s disjunction right now, (and of Melville’s caution), I suppose, because my project on Railroads and the Making of Modern America is at the end of 5 years. With the Center here, we have created a large digital archive, databases, experimented with visualization models, and produced some scholarly research publications. We have a cohort of graduate students in digital history trained and experienced and new students interested and involved. We have an audience of readers, students, and citizens, the public, general interest reader.
But Mcgann’s comment keeps raising its head. What we think we will build and what we build are not the same thing in digital humanities. Our archive might be only a “glancing bird’s eye view.”
This is as true of a book or a film as it is of a digital work. But right now, at this moment in the development of the digital medium, I think we can see how far we are from understanding the genre–of how far we are from being able to say send me “a treatment”. The distance between our wish and our object is often so great because the forms and practices and procedures of creation in the digital medium remain profoundly unstable and speculative.
Mcgann’s premise might be restated (he might not agree with this, I don’t know): if you have produced what you thought you would, perhaps you’ve not created anything really; if a digital project becomes what was specified it might not be a digital humanities work.
We have been asked to speak about challenges and opportunities today. I’ll suggest a few examples from our experience in the last few years with the Railroads project. What we really are asking today is how does scholarly practice change with digital humanities? Or how do we do humanities in the digital age?
This is very new. Everything is changing — our audiences, our procedures, our institutions.
So, one question we face is in Digital Humanities is:
1. IS AN ARCHIVE AN ARGUMENT? and a related question WHERE IS OUR SCHOLARSHIP?
Most projects in digital humanities begin as a digital archive, creating a collection of documents that are digitized. I want to encourage this–in the disciplines we need more attention to this work as scholarship. But digital scholars also seek to both assemble and analyze, both examine and interpret.
Five million books might be digitized, but the millions and millions of cubic feet of archival railroad records, well that was something else. What is a representative sample of railroad records?
We built a digital archive topically arranged for easy access and usability by the widest audience possible. Railroad texts were structurally so dissimilar that we confronted a major classification problem, one that we could not effectively address.
The point is that the architecture and encoding of a digital archive–what Johanna Drucker calls “creating the intellectual model”–must be undertaken speculatively. It must be adjusted, changed, explored. Interpretive archives cannot be built to spec.
At least in digital history, on one level, it is the diversity of document types that has yet to be fully confronted. We can build models from long runs of legal case files or printed texts or runaway slave newspaper advertisements, but when we turn to a domain such as railroads, or slavery, or genocide, or the family, the intellectual model behind an archive, so often expressed in encoded texts, becomes unwieldy.
This challenge is our opportunity–to reconsider the “digital archive” as intentional and interpretive–in our case to offer a new way to encounter the railroad–rather than focus attention on the board room, or the directors, the archive would open up a diverse array of railroad users and interfaces. Its argument would be to expose the ways railroads were used and thought of. We want to create a new history of the railroad.
But as we create interpretive archives we need to be able to answer the question: where is our scholarship. This is where we need allies–libraries in particular–as partners in modelling, preserving, and making available this scholarship.
The second question we face in digital humanities right now is how do we work differently.
2. TEAMS OF SCHOLARS IN THE HUMANITIES:
Digital humanities projects are often characterized as collaborative. In many respects this is the most obvious change in scholarly practice–we work with librarians, programmers, and colleagues in other disciplines.
The opportunity here seems self-evident. But the model of historical and humanities scholarship has been sole-author, sole-researcher for a long time, and for most universities the evaluation for hiring, promotion, and tenure proceeds to assess candidates on this basis.
In the Railroads project I wanted a team of graduate students to have the opportunity to gain experience in digital work, to advance their own scholarship, and where possible to participate in research publications. The challenge for digital humanities now is to make this work count where appropriate. We have begun keeping track of all research publications associated with the project–and we will be co-authoring new articles for the project with teams of researchers. In the early phase of digital humanities we built teams, and teams built projects. But now we are seeing teams contributing to publication streams.
The social structures for these contributions are not as yet settled. At the beginning of the project, I had only a vague idea how student colleagues would participate beyond building the digital project. Now, we are beginning to see projects build in publication objectives and contributions at the start.
A third question we face in digital humanities right now is:
3. WHAT DOES SCHOLARLY ARGUMENT LOOK LIKE IN DIGITAL FORM?
My colleagues at the Center for Digital Research in the Humanities and my graduate students in the Department of History patiently bore with me on this one. From the first I hoped to experiment with a new form for our historical interpretative work, and this is what we began to call an “assemblage” or a “view.” The view is a framed set of materials on a given subject that integrates sets of evidence and data around a specific historiographical problem or question, without directly narrating the subject. We wanted the views to inspire investigation and focus attention, to serve as interrelated starting points. We could have hundreds of views that build out of the collection.
The tools to assemble a view proved challenging to create–we were after all asking for an authoring tool for the digital medium. The rise of the blog in this same period reduced the incentive for experimentation with scholarly argument and hypertext.
The humble footnote is still the mark of scholarship and now we need to consider how we will migrate footnotes–the links and scholarly apparatus of a work–to digital form. This challenge and opportunity is surprising because the web is so good at linking. But we’ve not experimented as much as we could with discursive notes, linking, and narrative argument in digital form.
The changes in publication models should be an opportunity. We are on the cusp of a new genre of hybrid digital and print publishing. Books are and will be supported with digital sources and verifiable links to the elements that went into the study. Journals will move into the publication of born-digital work also, integrating print and digital formats.
In the humanities scholarly practice might shift toward a more fluid and open exchange of ideas and arguments characterized by a different sequence of activities:
from openly available original research
to pre-print presentation
to peer review publication
to a period of open verification
to a period of adjustment and re-examination.
We know that opportunities and challenges here remain. We are in the early stages of this medium. We should look for ways to enchant readers, to hold attention, and to create long-form argument. Here we might be working against the medium (jumping through links) but the iPad and tablets appear to be opening up new opportunities for our scholarship.
Finally, we are in a transition phase. We call what we are doing “digital humanities” or “digital history” but really we are doing humanities in the digital age, we are doing history in the digital age. This work might be characterized increasingly by three qualities:
1. increasing the scale of research and data involved: 5 million books, 100,000 newspaper articles–this is the least important characteristic actually because it is limited to scholars, but the challenge will be not only to support this research with infrastructure but to come up with intellectual models for such large scale interpretation. Imagine how these “distant readings” fit in a U.S. history or literature survey.
2. addressing the global distribution of discourse and materials: sources all over the world need to be brought together and the challenge will be to create new linkages in the cultural records of the world, from Cairo to Seville to London to Chicago. Language differences, copyright, and sheer distance will need to be overcome.
3. using new models of production: we have students as colleagues and citizens as colleagues, and the challenge here will be to validate and credit their contributions, integrate their work, and do so in a way that enables further scholarship.
We are doing nothing less than redefining our practices and at the same time the relationship of our society to the past, our literature, history, and culture.
Our digital age presents a different medium in which to convey multiple sources of information and to render interpretive arguments. It is instantiating different ways of knowing, different ways of seeing, reading, and learning. What we think we will build and what we build are not the same but we can and should celebrate and inquire into the difference. And one day, when the call comes, you might be able to say, “Sure, I’ll send you my treatment.”
Much has been made in our circles about Charles Joseph Minard’s map of the Napoleonic March, but Minard drew his first such graphs for railroads in France and developed his technique in works combining traffic and distances. In 1845 he published what he called his first “figurative map”
Minard’s work, however, took more than 15 years to reach the sophistication we so admire. These 15 years years witnessed the vast expansion of railroad culture in Europe and the U.S. Minard experimented with the forms for conveying multiple sources of information, but the disjunction between what he wished to build and what he built took time to resolve.
We are, Robert Darton argues, perhaps in a similar position–15 years into what he calls the 4th great Information Age in human history. We are learning how right now how to adjust!
An Addendum:
In the area of opportunities, I’ve lay out these, rather quickly and without any checking–areas of engagement in Digital Humanities research that are either being funded, or conducted, or appear to take the field in important new directions (these are not in order of any rank–the titles are mine and made up)–and as a word of caution I know little about many of these areas.
A.) Big Data and Cyberinfrastructure: of the sort being done in NEH Digging into Data and various Mellon projects. These projects are following the directions largely pointed to in the 2005 ACLS Cyberinfrastructure report (Unsworth et al.). It seems unlikely that this trend will slow down and indeed all signs (n-grams) point to quite the reverse. The project most in the public is “culturomics”– Erez Lieberman Aiden and Jean-Baptiste Michel on “What we learned from 5 million books.” Although their example of “slavery” and its spike in the 1860s and 1960s seems strikingly obvious, the n-gram and big data approach potentially challenge what has been a defining DH practice: building an intellectual model around interpretive digital archives.
B.) Brain Science and Humanities: This research would be an area of work suggested by Cathy Davidson’s new book, Now You See It, and the PBS digital nation special last year. Other recent research in this area includes for example the Center for Applied Linguistics’ Brain Research: Implications for Second Language Learning.
C.) Performance/Materiality of Scholarship in DH/”Embodied” Research: the latest issue of Digital Humanities Quarterly, we see a piece directly on this subject from Helen J. Burgess and Jeanne Hamming and we have already seen some clear indications of this work in the Nebraska Digital Workshop, its range, significance, and theoretical and methodological tendencies. In fact, across the field of History, we are seeing more research focused on “sensory” history. Margaret Jacobs Bancroft Prize-winning work here at Nebraska on the removal of indigenous children and boarding schools adopts this analytical method. DHers are beginning to push toward broader “embodied” scholarship and explore how the multimedia technology would represent or immerse this scholarship.
–Virtual Realities: This could be its own grouping probably but it seems to me to have shifted somewhat as a major area of research and could be subsumed under the above heading. Harvard’s “Mixed Reality City” and UCLA’s Hypercities are next generation virtual reality environments, as are dozens of other GPS enabled encoding projects (Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago, . . .). These projects have a different set of research objectives from their virtual reality predecessors.
D.) Beyond Markup–Hermeneutics and Encoding Theory and Practice: Here I’m way out of my area, but the questions are big and important, and a great deal of Digital Humanities work remains to be done in this area. The problems surround XML encoding, TEI, and the questions of linearity, multidimensionality, fluidity, subjectivity, and multiple perspectives. A good example of this work is presented in Digital Humanities Quarterly by Fiormonte, Martiradonna, and Schmidt “Digital Encoding as a Hermeneutic and Semiotic Act” but Johanna Drucker has been writing about this and so has Jerome McGann, Stephen Ramsay, and Espen Aarseth. The point here is that the structures of XML encoding were designed for information storage and retrieval but we find ourselves in Digital Humanities perhaps as McLuhan stated in 1967 “in the name of progress our official culture is striving to force the new media to do the work of the old.”
E.) New Scholarly Formats:here I would refer not to the technologies or social practices to enable open “digital commons” or to defenses of open access, but to the cluster of research agendas around discovering new forms of scholarly communication through multi-use, mixed new media, copyright clearance, mash ups, e books, and experimentation of any kind with the delivery, dissemination, or arrangement of scholarly work. The focus here is on authorship, creativity, design, “new model scholarship”, born digital work, and readership. Some of these efforts have taken place in History–the original AHR articles (mine included), and more recently the Writing History in the Digital Age (underway), and the Hacking the Academy digital cultures project (just released). Stephen Ramsay here has pioneered some of this with the blog to book project. And Douglas Seefeldt has with the Sustaining Digital History project and thinking about short-form digital history scholarship. We are, however, a long way from knowing how this will turn out.
F: Interfaces for Humanities: Johanna Drucker has written about this in SpecLab: Digital Aesthetics and Projects in Speculative Computing, and Stan Ruecker has written about this widely. 
William G. Thomas teaches U.S. history and specialize in Digital Humanities, Digital History, The Civil War, the U.S. South, and Slavery. He currently serves as the Chair of the Department of History at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and as the John and Catherine Angle Chair in the Humanities. He graduated from Episcopal High School in Alexandria, Virginia, and Trinity College in Connecticut, and earned his M.A. and Ph.D. in History at the University of Virginia.
Among the first scholars to work in the emerging field of digital humanities/digital history, Thomas worked with Edward L. Ayers on the Valley of the Shadow Project. He served as a project manager at the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities, as a Teaching with Technology Fellow, and then an assistant professor and Director of the Virginia Center for Digital History at the University of Virginia. He served as Director of the Virginia Center for Digital History from 1998 to 2005. Edward L. Ayers, Anne S. Rubin, and Thomas were awarded the Lincoln Prize in 2001 from the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg College for the Valley of the Shadow project, and the James Harvey Robinson Prize from the American Historical Association in recognition of the project as an outstanding contribution to the teaching of history. The Valley Project continues to be recognized as a pioneering digital humanities project.
Thomas was named a Mead Honored Faculty member in the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of Virginia in 2004-05. The Mead faculty propose a “dream project” and are recognized for outstanding undergraduate teaching. Thomas’s dream project was to produce a documentary film with undergraduate students, based on digitized films in his Civil Rights Television News digital history project. The result was “Rising Up”–a student-created documentary film that aired in 2008 on over 20 N.E.T.A. (PBS) affiliated stations–and recognized as a model “authentic learning” project by the EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative.
At the University of Nebraska, he has received several fellowships and grants, including a Digital Innovation Fellowship in 2008 from the American Council of Learned Societies, and a highly competitive research grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities Office of Digital Humanities for “Railroads and the Making of Modern America.” He served as the Visiting Professor of North American Studies at the Eccles Centre for American Studies at the British Library, in London, England, in 2008. In 2012 Thomas received the Hazel R. McClymont Distinguished Teaching Fellow Award from the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of Nebraska for outstanding teaching.
His recent book The Iron Way: Railroads, The Civil War, and the Making of Modern America (Yale University Press) was a 2012 Lincoln Prize Finalist from the Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History.
He is the director or co-director of numerous digital history projects, including  “Railroads and the Making of Modern America” and the Digital History Project. He is leading a new digital project, The History Harvest, aimed at digitizing the nation’s family and community history.
Documentary films are intensely collaborative efforts, and I feel fortunate to have had the opportunity to work on several teams. These have focused on the South, Virginia, Civil Rights, and the Civil War. Each one has been different, but I have written, produced, or co-produced:
RISING UP
“Rising Up: Virginia’s Civil Rights Movement” co-producer with Bill Reifenberger, University of Virginia, The Community Ideas Station, 2007, NETA, 2008. The film broadly covers the South, but concentrates on Virginia and follows major events with close, personal stories, including: Samuel W. Tucker’s 1939 library sit-in, Irene Morgan’s 1946 busing case before the Supreme Court, the school desegregation crisis in 1958-59, the 1960 sit-ins, the violence of Danville and Birmingham in 1963, and the resurgence of black voting and politics in 1965. Asking what made everyday people decide to take a stand in a time of transition and cultural conflict? This is the question at the heart and soul of Rising Up. In asking it and answering it, the film brings a fresh perspective to the civil rights struggle. Aired February 2008 on over 20 NETA affiliated stations.
 For a short from Rising Up, go to Rising Up–on Southern Spaces
MASSIVE RESISTANCE
 “Massive Resistance” co-produced with George Gilliam, with the Community Ideas Stations, 1999. Massive Resistance earned an Emmy Nomination and has aired numerous times in the years since. The film chronicled the history of school desegregation in Virginia, and the massive resistance campaign to prevent school desegregation in the 1950s. Bringing alive the stories of this searing experience through interviews with black and white Virginians, Massive Resistance explored the student strike of 1951 in Prince Edward County, and the lawsuit that became one of the key cases in the Brown v. Board of Education case. Includes interview with Presidential Medal of Freedom recipient Oliver Hill. Aired September 15, 2000.
THE GROUND BENEATH OUR FEET Documentary film series The Ground Beneath Our Feet was produced by Central Virginia Educational Television, with George H. Gilliam, including episodes on “Reconfiguring Virginia,” aired October 1, 1999, “New Deal Virginia,” aired February 26, 1999, “Massive Resistance,” aired September 15, 2000, and “Virginia Fights: World War II,” aired September 1, 2001.

The Iron Way: Railroads, The Civil War, and the Making of Modern America with Yale University Press was released in September 2011. The book has been named:
A 2012 Lincoln Prize Finalist from the Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History
The 2012 Winner of the New York Book Festival in the History category
My next research project, tentatively The Petition: Mima Queen, Black Freedom, and Post-Revolutionary America, looks at newly discovered case files of African Americans in the District of Columbia courts for the period 1800 to 1860, and chronicles the story of Mima Queen’s historic petition for freedom from slavery which came before the U.S. Supreme Court in 1813.
Recent books, chapters, and other publications include:
“‘Swerve Me?’: The South, Railroads, and the Rush to Modernity” in The Old South’s Modern Worlds: Slavery, Region, and Nation in the Age of Progress ed. by Diane Barnes, Brian Schoen, and Frank Towers (forthcoming from Oxford University Press, April 2011)
“Interchange: The Promise of Digital History,” in The Journal of American History, September 2008.
“Black and On the Border,” co-author with Edward L. Ayers and Anne S. Rubin, in Slavery, Resistance, Freedom ed. Gabor Boritt and Scott Hancock, Oxford University Press, 2007.
“Nothing Ought to Astonish Us: Confederate Civilians in the 1864 Shenandoah Valley Campaign” in The Shenandoah Valley Campaign of 1864, ed. Gary Gallagher, University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
“Computing and the Historical Imagination,”  in A Companion to Digital Humanities, ed. Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth, Oxford: Blackwell, 2004.
“The Differences Slavery Made: A Close Analysis of Two American Communities,”co-author with Edward L. Ayers, in The American Historical Review.
 Lawyering for the Railroad: Business, Law and Power in the New South, Louisiana State University Press, 1999.
The Civil War on the Web: A Guide to the Very Best Sites, co-author with Alice Carter and Richard Jensen, Rowman & Littlefield, 2000.
Essays, Op-Ed articles, Digital works, and Other Writings:
Page 99 Test for The Iron Way, The Page 99 Test, October 27, 2011.
A Turning Point for Richmond: The Virginia Historical Society’s Civil War Exhibition, June 26, 2011, Southern Spaces
“How Do We Remember Our Confederate History?” Roanoke Times, April 17, 2010.
“William Jennings Bryan, The Railroads, and the Politics of ‘Workingmen,’” Nebraska Law Review, Vol. 86, 2007.
“What is Digital History? A Look at Some Exemplar Projects,” with Douglas Seefeldt, AHA Perspectives, May 2009.
“Writing a Digital History Journal Article from Scratch: An Account,”Digital History, 2008.
“Shaping Nebraska: An Analysis of Railroad Land Sales, 1870-1880″ with Kurt Kinbacher, Great Plains Quarterly, Vol. 28, 2008.
“The Countryside Transformed: The Eastern Shore of Virginia, the Pennsylvania Railroads, the Creation of a Modern Landscape,” with Brooks M. Barnes and Tom Szuba, Southern Spaces, 2007.
“Television News of the Civil Rights Struggle: The Views in Virginia and Mississippi,”Southern Spaces, 2004.
My great passions in life are my family, my writing and work, and sailing. Collected here are a few photographs of some of the highlights of each of these for me, going way back! I hope you enjoy them.
Family
With my siblings, in the boxwood at Clarens, Alexandria, Virginia, 1976.
With Heather, January, 2009.
Work, Writing, and Friends
Ed Ayers, me, and Anne Rubin, at the Museum of Frontier Culture, Staunton, Virginia, 1997.
With Anne Rubin and Ed Ayers at the Lincoln Prize awards, Union League Club, New York City, 2001.
With Ernest “Boots” Mead, at the Mead Honored Faculty Awards, 2005, University of Virginia Rotunda.
Valley of the Shadow project reunion, January 7, 2012
A lousy photograph but a great time with my Valley of the Shadow friends, from left Scott Nesbit, Andrew Torget, Amy Murrell Taylor, Edward L. Ayers, Anne Rubin, me. At one of my favorite places, Third Coast Cafe, Chicago.
Sailing!
 Learning to sail a Sunfish, Rehoboth Bay, 1973.
 Freedom ’83 Campaign, on board Spirit of America, off Newport, RI, 1982. I had the great opportunity to be on the team in the summer of 1982, sailing Magic, Spirit of America, and the 1980 Cup winner Freedom.
Sailing with my daughter, Lincoln Sailing Club, NE, 2009 (left) and U. S. National Championships, Snipe class, Pensacola Florida, 2009 (right). 
Reviews of The Iron Way: Railroads, the Civil War, and the Making of Modern America (Yale University Press, 2011).
Wes Vernon, in The Washington Times, May 8, 2012.
Charles Stephen, in The Lincoln Journal Star, March 11, 2012.
Elizabeth Varon, in Civil War Monitor, October 26, 2011
Bernard Kempinski, in U.S. Military Railroad Blog, February 9, 2012.
Kevin Levin, Blog post, “The Future of Slavery,” Civil War Memory, November 25, 2011.
 Reviews of The Civil War on the Web: A Guide to the Very Best Sites (Scholarly Resources, 2000)
Reviews of Lawyering for the Railroad: Business, Law and Power in the New South (Louisiana State University Press, 1999).
Frank G. Queen,  Southern Cultures, 6.4 (2000).
Steven Collins, Law and History Review, Vol. 20.2 (Summer 2002).
Harold Hyman, Journal of Southern History, November 2001.
 Florida Historical Quarterly, October 2001.
 American Historical Review, June 2001.
 Journal of American History, March 2001.
Christopher Tomlins, “How to Succeed in Business? ‘The first thing we do, let’s hire all the lawyers,’” Reviews in American History, September 2000.
 Journal of Illinois History, Autumn 2000.
Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Fall 2000.
 Richmond Times-Dispatch, July 23, 2000.
 Virginia Quarterly Review, Vol. 76, No. 2.
 Business History Review, Summer 2000.
 Register of the Kentucky Historical Society, Summer 2000.
 Georgia Historical Quarterly, Summer 2000.
William Childs, H-Net Reviews, June 2000. 
July 1, 2012“The Pacific Railway Act of 1862: A War Measure,” National Park Service Homestead National Monument, Beatrice, NE, Laws that Built America Celebration.
June 9, 2012The Iron Way book talk and the Civil War in Alexandria, Va., Gilder Lehrman Institute for Teachers, Virginia Theological Seminary, Alexandria, Va., and Manassas National Battlefield.
June 5, 2012The History Harvest Project and the Civil War 150th,” Daughters of the American Revolution, Omaha, Nebraska.
May 18, 2012“The Iron Way” book talk, The Library of Virginia, Richmond, Va., 12 noon.
March 29, 2012“Railroads, Art, and the Making of Modern America,” Sheldon Museum of Art.
February 18, 2012Railroads and the Making of Modern America,” ProRAIL Nebraska,Milo Ball Student Union, University of Nebraska-Omaha, 9:00 a.m.
November 2, 2011Book Talk and Signing, University of Nebraska Bookstore, Lincoln, Nebraska.
October 19, 2011OAH Distinguished Lecture, Railroads, the Civil War, and Modern America, Miami University, Ohio.
October 14, 2011Innovations in Digital Research: Challenges and Opportunities, Nebraska Digital Workshop, Lincoln, Nebraska.
September 23, 2011C-SPAN “The Contenders” series live, on William Jennings Bryan and the 1896 Campaign.
June 26-27, 2011Teaching American History, Gilder-Lehrman Institute of American History, Cripple Creek, CO
June 8-9, 2011National Endowment for the Humanities, Digging into Data Competition, Presentations, Washington, D.C.
April 13, 2011“Railroads, the Making of Modern America, and the Shaping of the Great Plains,” Olson Seminar, Center for Great Plains Studies, Lincoln, NE
March 17, 2011“African American Mobility after Emancipation,” Organization of American Historians conference panel, Houston, TX
February 26, 2011“Railroads and the Making of Modern America,” Railroad History Society, Great Plains Chapter, Grand Island, NE
February 16, 2011“The Civil War as a Modern War,” Des Moines Civil War Roundtable, Des Moines, IO, 6:00 p.m. at the Machine Shed Restaurant
These projects continue to grow and change online. All have been deeply collaborative efforts, and represent the teamwork of many scholars, students, and colleagues. I feel grateful to have been a part of these:
“The Valley of the Shadow: Two Communities in the American Civil War,” co-author with Edward L. Ayers, Andrew Torget, and Anne S. Rubin, 1993-2008.
“Railroads and the Making of Modern America,” University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
“Digital History” co-produced with Douglas Seefeldt, University of Nebraska.
“The Aurora Project: Spatio-Temporal Tools for History” This project is funded with a National Endowment for the Humanities Digging into Data grant. Co-directed with Richard Healey, University of Portsmouth (UK). University of Nebraska.
“Television News of the Civil Rights Era,” Virginia Center for Digital History, University of Virginia.
“The Countryside Transformed: The Railroad and the Eastern Shore of Virginia, 1870-1935,” co-produced with Brooks M. Barnes, Virginia Center for Digital History, University of Virginia.
My family’s roots are in Virginia and Maryland. I’ve spend most of my life in Virginia, but recently moved to the Great Plains of Nebraska where I teach at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
I was born in Alexandria, Virginia, in 1964. My father was born in Alexandria, Virginia in 1939, and my mother was born in Norfolk, Virginia. The Thomas side were Welsh immigrants arriving in Virginia, sometime in the early nineteenth century. My middle name is “Griffith,” about as Welsh as it gets. The Griffith Thomases still hold the annual Thomas family reunion at historic Mt. Zion Church in Aldie, Virginia, every June.
I grew up on Seminary Ridge in a house at 318 N. Quaker Lane called “Clarens,” originally built in 1781. After the Civil War, the house was Va. U.S. Senator James Murray Mason’s home. Mason was an ardent secessionist, and of no relation to the Thomas family. After Alexandria was occupied by federal troops in 1861, Clarens was a hospital during the war for Union soldiers–it stood adjacent to “Cranford” — my grandfather’s house –and across the Quaker Lane from “Montrose” –my uncle’s house.
All three Thomas homes were part of what was called “Fort Williams”–the Union fort next down the Seminary ridge from Fort Worth, a larger installation. Cranford next door was the “officer’s quarters,” and there is still today at that site a full Civil War-era powder magazine with brick walls underground and Union soldiers’ signatures on its walls, many of them barely visible now but clearly marked “1861″. And you can probably find mine and my cousins’ initials on those old walls as well, circa 1971. We played in the powder magazine and on the embankments of the fort that still stood around these houses.
I love historic houses, gardens, landscapes, and places. The events of the American Revolution, the Civil War, and the colonial past did not seem so distant to me, growing up at Clarens. The gardens and walkways were lined with huge American boxwood–beautiful, gnarly bushes hundreds of years old. Up on Seminary ridge, from the window in my room, I could see the broad Potomac River in the distance to the east, and Old Town Alexandria with its brick warehouses and cobble stone streets. I could hear the railroads every night moving through Cameron Station to the west. My interest in history came from growing up in Alexandria with its diverse people and their complicated history, and living in and around old houses.
When I’m not teaching, writing, or doing history, I’m sailing. I learned to sail at Rehoboth Bay Sailing Association in Delaware. Now, I’m teaching my children to sail at the Lincoln Sailing Club and racing sailboats whenever and wherever I can find open water, a fresh breeze, and good company.