Here at the University of Virginia a group of scholars from various disciplines meets periodically to discuss digital scholarship. We began meeting a few years ago, and we call ourselves EELS (it stands for “electronically enabled literary scholarship.”) At one of our earliest meetings we read articles by Mark Bauerlein and Nicholas Carr, readings we termed “anti-EELS.” Their arguments are rather played-out by this time, but a few years ago were gaining steam: Carr’s article “Is Google Making Us Stupid?” had just appeared in the Atlantic, and Bauerlein asked in the Chronicle whether online literacy is of a lesser kind (both have since expanded their arguments books). Forget about challenging the place of digital scholarship in the academy: Carr and Bauerlein challenged very idea that the internet and the digital age left us any ability to think at all.
Even in 2008, of course, Carr and Bauerlein did not speak for everyone. Bauerlein cites Leah Price, for example, who argues that we need to expand our notions of what “reading” means. The response that most intrigues me, though, is Steven Pinker’s. In a New York Times op-ed Pinker (a cognitive scientist at Harvard) takes issue with Carr’s argument that the internet affects our brains: “cognitive neuroscientists roll their eyes at such talk. Yes, every time we learn a fact or skill the wiring of the brain changes; it’s not as if the information is stored in the pancreas. But the existence of neural plasticity does not mean the brain is a blob of clay pounded into shape by experience.” Pinker goes on to compare Carr to “primitive peoples who believe that eating fierce animals will make them fierce.” By writing “as if the brain takes on the qualities of whatever it consumes” Carr and Bauerlein seem to “assume that watching quick cuts in rock videos turns your mental life into quick cuts or that reading bullet points and Twitter postings turns your thoughts into bullet points and Twitter postings.”
Digital humanists have of course found academic uses for Twitter, and might take exception to this particular example. But Pinker’s larger point is an accusation that I think we must take seriously. His response to Carr is, essentially “you just don’t understand the brain”: he draws a boundary between the cognitive neuroscientists rolling their eyes and the poor humanist who can’t tell the brain from the pancreas. So while I applaud Pinker’s argument, the tone has me a bit worried.
Many humanists are no stranger to Steven Pinker, who ranks high on a short list of scientists whose work forms the basis of another emerging area of humanistic inquiry: cognitive literary studies. The 1990s was declared “the decade of the brain,” and during the same period in which the digital humanities have become so prominent, a parallel movement has connected humanistic research to brain science. But as Jonathan Kramnick has argued, this scholarship has its risks. While hoping to add a “scientific” basis to humanistic questions, proponents of cognitive approaches sometimes wind up, like Carr, drawing on a field without really understanding it. Literary Darwinism, says Kramnick, might not “bring us any closer to science. At the very least, the substance of the claim fails to represent debates within the sciences themselves.”
Like cognitive literary studies, digital humanities must draw on other disciplines, using methods and tools that many humanities scholars aren’t comfortable with. And digital humanities has witnessed similar debates about the extent to which we must immerse ourselves in these other disciplines. Do we, as Stephen Ramsay suggests, have to know how to code, and build things? Do we have to be trained statisticians so that the our text-mining results are “statistically significant? Are we more or less rigorous than the proponents of culturomics, whose work many humanities scholars seem skeptical about? These are questions about method, and interdisciplinarity, and collaboration. And they’re not particularly new questions. But I do think the comparison between digital humanities and cognitive literary studies is a useful one: how can tools and methods from other disciplines help us answer questions in our own?
As a parting note, I’ll point to Cathy Davidson’s upcoming course, which looks to be a model for interdisciplinary teaching. Perhaps this approach will begin to connect the humanities with the brain and the internet.
Browse:Home/Image of the Week – Girl dressed as Pierrot
By ottelizabeth on October 18, 2011
This photograph from the Frances Benjamin Johnston Collection at the Library of Congress seems appropriate as we approach Halloween.
Posted in Uncategorized | 
I recently had the experience of being interviewed for a newspaper article about the Rare Book School, where I work part time. The reporter, a forthright sort of journalist with a minimally cynical affect, told me his angle right from the beginning: the book, it seems—that is, the physical book, that persistent little brick of printed pages seen often cluttering the tops of coffee-tables or sagging the center of poorly constructed bookshelves—is dead. In this digital age we live in, we no longer need those moldering tomes to weigh us down. All the heavy weight of books is soon to be lifted, replaced by the ephemeral imp of digital ether.
We talked over dinner, a communal affair at RBS, and while the two faculty members to my right argued about current trends in curation and collection, the reporter told me a little about his comic book collection and about reading children’s books to his son on his ipad. He asked me what I thought of his dead-books idea and I told him, gently I hoped, that there are always other angles. Why, I asked, must we perpetuate this battle between book and everything else in the modern world that vies for our attention? Radios, televisions, movies, and now the computer—what if they offer us not an alternative to print, but a series of complements, many voices in a multi-layered harmony. He seemed dubious, but listened politely enough.
When the article came out, the print-is-dead premise remained, and I read it in two formats: on paper and online; someone even posted a link to it on facebook. There were of course differences in the two versions—different pictures accompanied the online text, and it had been shortened in such a way that made the prose at times choppy. I wondered which version the reporter preferred: the one that left a few inkstains on the hands of its reader or the one that ended up in my email inbox.
So much of digital humanities scholarship has focused on how we embrace the physical world even when our arms are made of circuits and software. This, to me, is what makes the world of the digital humanities so very vitally important—far from living in the cloud, digital humanities has its feet in on the ground, worrying about how we manage data, where we store it, and how we keep it sustainable. It is often theoretical work, but the sort that makes possible the commingling of artifact and simulacra. Digital humanities scholarship can, I believe, if we invest enough of ourselves into it, give us a Grand Unifying Theory that explains why a man whose profession has grown fat on the persistence of print and who lovingly hordes each issue and edition of The Green Hornet first thumbed in childhood raptures would be so gleeful at the demise of the book.
Months later, I find myself in conversation with fellow grad students about finding a well-edited digital edition of an essay on Tennyson. We denigrate the poor quality of OCR and trade googling strategies and talk about the difficulties of the facsimile.
In the classroom, my students have laptops but also print-outs. Sometimes they even buy the book, and decorate the pages with a veritable rainbow of exuberant post-it notes. They text one another furiously, especially when they think I am not looking.
Maybe the book is dead after all. But if this is so I want to be a necromancer, and with the magic of code I want to resurrect the ghosts of books–the real ghost in the machine.
 
By alexgil on October 24, 2011
This picture almost brought tears to my eyes. I was born and raised not far from here. The scene depicted in the picture takes place by the Ozama river. The wall on the right side only survives in part. The houses in the front of the picture have long been demolished to make way for tourists. The slightly taller building in the back is the old Atarazana (shipyard). The man walking up the street with a book and the photographer testify to the intellectual vibrancy of the old city. Many contemporary artists and writers continue to hang out around these parts of town.
Posted in american studies, photography| Tagged Caribbean, colonial, Santo Domingo | 
By Dana Wheeles on October 25, 2011
The first two documents produced during our 2011 NINES / NEH Summer Institute on Evaluating Digital Scholarship have been released: a Statement on Authorship and a set of Recommendations for Chairs of Language and Literature Departments for creating an atmosphere that is conducive to work in new media. We have others in the pipeline and will be releasing them in the coming months. We welcome readers’ feedback!
The Call for Proposals and Participants in our 2012 Summer Institute has also been announced, with a special emphasis on the participation of department chairs. We’ll be revisiting the 2011 documents and refining them, and hopefully creating more guidelines for evaluating digital scholarship.
Posted in digital humanities, summer institute | 
By Dana Wheeles on October 31, 2011
After it emerged in the 1860s, thanks to an accidental double-exposure of a portrait taken by photographer William H. Mumler, spirit photography was wildly popular in the nineteenth century. Many believed that those ghostly after-images were actually the camera capturing departed loved ones and other souls from the beyond. While this method has been thoroughly debunked, it is clear that, even in the twenty-first century, photography remains a central tool of ghost hunting.
Happy Halloween!
Posted in features, photography | 
By Dana Wheeles on November 8, 2011
This print from the Library of Congress is a satirical take on the Glentworth scandal of 1840, in which a tobacco inspector plotted to sway a New York election for the Whigs by illegal means. Originally, the term, “Locofoco” referred to a radical faction of the Democratic Party who were strongly in favor of workers’ unions and anti-monopoly, but by the time of this drawing, the term had been generalized to refer to all Democrats.
In an attempt to mock attempts to sensationalize the scandal, the artist has portrayed Glentworth himself as a large cat causing a ruckus in the kitchen. Scullery maid “Miss Whiting” (a reference to New York District Attorney James Whiting) shouts, “The Whigs, The Whigs” as four prominent members of the Democratic Party come thundering down the stairs to intervene.
Posted in american studies, features | 
By heatherbowlby on November 14, 2011
Gaston Tissandier (1843-1899) was a French chemist, meteorologist, aviation pioneer, and adventurer. Along with his brother, Albert, he edited the French scientific journal La Nature, which aimed to popularize science. Gaston was particularly interested in ballooning, and during the Franco-Prussian War in September 1870, he made a spectacular escape from besieged Paris by balloon.
This illustration from La Nature depicts the aftermath of Gaston’s most daring ballooning feat, in which he was able to reach the unheard-of altitude of 28,000 feet in April 1875. Both of Gaston’s companions, journalist Joseph Crocé-Spinelli and naval officer Henri Sivel, later died from the effects of breathing the thin air. Gaston survived, but became deaf.
Undeterred, the Tissandier brothers continued to conduct aviation experiments, and in 1883 they developed the first electric-powered flight by fitting a Siemens motor to an airship.
Posted in images, press, Uncategorized | 
Beyond Accessibility: Textual Studies in the 21st Century
Call for Papers
The Textual Studies team of INKE (Implementing New Knowledge Environments) wish to invite presentation proposals for Beyond Accessibility: Textual Studies in the 21st Century .
 June 8, 9, and 10, 2012, University of Victoria, Victoria BC, Canada.
 Keynote speakers: Adriaan van der Weel (Leiden University) and Sydney Shep, (Victoria University of Wellington)
At the end of the 20th century, textual studies witnessed a revolution in accessibility to texts with the explosion of the internet. Now we simply take it for granted that digital processes infuse every step of our study, editing, production, and dissemination of texts. The Textual Studies team of INKE invites presentations that address the questions “What is the state of textual studies in the 21st century? What is the important work of textual studies in the 21st century? What are the outstanding issues, challenges, concerns, emerging trends, methods, attitudes, and exciting developments in textual scholarship? Papers may address such questions as
 What is the state of the scholarly edition after the transition from print to print and digital?
 What is the impact on the material book and on book history of the different kinds of access enabled by the digital medium?
 How have authorship attribution studies been transformed by access to so many more searchable texts?
 How has the new age of access to materials affected the state of textual studies in various regions of the globe?
 How well are scholars being served by traditional and emerging infrastructures for the study, creation, production, and dissemination of texts?
 What is the future of, for example, the study of readership and letter writing, genetic editing, and reception history?
INKE is a multi-national, multi-disciplinary research initiative, funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and partnering organizations, to study, develop, and implement digital environments for reading and research (www.inke.ca). The Textual Studies Team of INKE is researching ways in which the age of manuscript and print production can inform our development and implementation of electronic reading technologies.
We invite proposals for papers, posters/demonstrations, and roundtable discussions that address these and other issues pertinent to research in textual studies. Proposals should contain a title, a detailed and focussed abstract (of approximately 300 words) plus list of works cited, and the names, affiliations, and Website URLs of presenters. Please send proposals before 15 December 2011 to richard.cunningham@acadiau.ca.
Potential participants in the conference, particularly those coming from abroad, might be interested to take advantage of the Digital Humanities Summer Institute, which will just before our conference, from 4-8 June, also at the University of Victoria (http://www.dhsi.org/). A limited number of scholarships for workshop tuition will be available for graduate students participating in the Beyond Accessibility conference. Also of potential interest is the annual conference of the Society for Digital Humanities (SDH/SEMI) at the Congress of the Humanities and Social Sciences at Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario, 28-30 May, 2012 (http://www.sdh-semi.org/).
Following last week’s symposium here at UVA, I found myself recalling Roger Lundin’s essay in Pedagogy from a few years ago: “the teachers who mattered most to me did so because of what they loved,” writes Lundin. “As I taught, in other words, I learned I had come to love what my most effective teachers had loved, and they had taught me how” (137). Lundin, riffing on Wordsworth’s Prelude – “what we have loved, others will love, and we will teach them how” – offers a viewpoint that I think was implicit in many of the discussions. The symposium marks in the inauguration of Institute of the Humanities and Global Cultures, and Steve Ramsay began his talk by praising institutes like this one for providing an opportunity for scholars to live an intellectual life in community with others. Community – which means, people – is as important to academic fields as the theories and methodologies that were the symposium’s explicit focus.
Lundin again: “For the past several decades in the humanities, our discourse has been theory-rich, perhaps theory-saturated, and we have developed explanations for everything from the nuances of différance to the needs of the subaltern. But when have we thought about love?” (134). Love of our work, Lundin means, and in a real, non-theoretical sense. A flurry of recent posts (like Natalie Cecire’s and Jean Bauer’s) has considered the place of theory in digital humanities. And perhaps the most important argument to arise from symposium (besides the institute itself, of course) will be Bethany Nowviskie’s call for reform of graduate training, to match the methods and questions that will form the future. But in the words of the Black Eyed Peas, where is the love?
For digital humanities, the response to the Black Eyed Peas comes from the Troggs: love is all around. At THATCamps, at MLA sessions, on Twitter – digital humanists seem to have a fondness for their work, an emotional connection to their theoretical arguments. Panels play to packed houses, in a way that other fields seem not to. This isn’t to say that everyone always agrees with each other, or that theoretical conversations don’t happen. The teachers who matter to us, Lundin is careful to state, are not necessarily the ones with whom we always agree: “my most influential teachers had religious commitments, political views, or theoretical understanding that differed sharply from my own” (137). Disagreement of course fosters insights. Responding to Bethany, Ryan Cordell hopes to reform undergraduate teaching as well. Ted Underwood, though, is “not yet sure about the implications at the undergraduate level. Maybe ten years from now I’ll be teaching text mining to undergrads … but then again, maybe the things undergraduates need most from an English course will still be historical perspective, close reading, a willingness to revise, and a habit of considering objections to their own thesis.” In considering how our pedagogical goals might change, Ted gives what I think is the best and most concise list of what those goals are now (at least the best I’ve heard).
Academics are teachers, and I’m excited to see that teaching has become a center of the conversation in digital humanities, with both graduate students and undergraduates involved in digital scholarship. We can say to the leaders in the field, what you love we will love: teach us how.Continue reading at http://www.nines.org/news/?p=1395 .