Every once in a while, a new project comes around bearing a message loud and clear: this is a sign of things to come. ORBIS, the Stanford Geospatial Network Model of the Roman World, is one such project.
ORBIS was created by Walter Scheidel, Elijah Meeks, and a host of others. At the very beginning, I should point out I am not a classicist. The below review is of the nature rather than the content of ORBIS as a scholarly product.
Roman Travel Network
ORBIS is many things but, most simply, it is an interface allowing researchers to experience the geography of the Roman world from an ancient perspective. The executive summary: given any two cities in the ancient world, it returns the fastest, cheapest, or shortest route between them, given the month, the mode of transportation, and various other options. It’s Google Maps for the ancient world, complete with the “Avoid Highways” feature.
I was among the lucky few to see an early version of the tool, and after sending back an informal review, Elijah Meeks invited me to review the site publicly via my blog. The first section explains what I feel is the most important contribution of ORBIS to the Digital Humanities; it is a reflexive tool that allows the humanist to engage with the process as well as the product. I then highlight some of the cool features, and finally list some rough edges and desiderata for future iterations or similar projects.
Beyond being an exceptionally well-made and useful tool, it is not the tool itself which makes ORBIS stand out. Walter Scheidel and Elijah Meeks could have posted the automated map portion of the site by itself, and it would have garnered deserving praise, but they went well beyond that goal; they made a reflexive tool.
ORBIS is among the first digital scholarly tools for the humanities (that I have encountered) that really lives up to the name “digital scholarly tool for the humanities.” Beyond being a simple tool, ORBIS is an explicit and transparent argument, a way of presenting research that also happens to allow, by its very existence, further research to be done. It is a map that allows the user to engage in the process of map-making, and a presentation of a process that allows the user to make and explore in ways the initial creators could not have foreseen. Of course, as with any project there are a few rough edges and desired features, which I’ll get into further down below.
Elevation data to help model the difficulty in getting from one place to another.
Along with the map, the Makers of this project (by which I mean authors, developers, data gatherers, …) present a fairly interactive documentary of the map-making process, including historical accounts, data sources, algorithmic explanations, visual aids, downloadable data, and a forthcoming API. They built an explicit model of the ancient world, taking into account roads and rivers, oceans and coastlines, weather and geographic features, various modes of transportation for civilian and military purposes, and put it all together so any researcher can sit down and figure out how long it would have taken, or how expensive it would have been, to travel between 751 locations in the ancient Roman world. Rather than asking us to trust that their data are accurate, the makers revealed their model – their underlying argument – for critique and extension.
The ORBIS model includes 751 sites covering about 4 million square miles of ancient space, including over 50,000 miles of road or desert tracks, nearly 20,000 miles of navigable rivers and canals, and almost 1,000 sea routes between sea ports. As I mentioned earlier, the model works like Google Maps; given two locations, it tells you the cheapest, shortest, or fastest route between them. These calculations take into account the time-of-year and usual weather, elevation changes between sites, fourteen modes of travel (ox cart, foot, army on march, camel caravan, etc.), river travel (including extra difficulty moving upstream), etc.
The ORBIS Interface
Another exciting feature on ORBIS is the distance cartogram. This visualization reveals the impact of travel speed and transport prices on overall connectivity; it allows the researcher to see how far other cities were with respect to a certain core city (for instance Constantinople) from the perspective of cost and travel time rather than mere geographical distance. This feature brings the researcher closer to the actual ancient Roman experience. A larger insight is revealed when taking a “distant reading” approach to the cartogram: “Distance cartograms show that due to massive cost differences between aquatic and terrestrial modes of transport, peripheries were far more remote from the center in terms of price than in terms of time.”
Constantinople Cartogram
ORBIS is a big step forward in designing digital scholarly objects for the digital humanities. It is a tool that is both useful and reflexive, offering engagement with both process and product. It also exemplifies an increasingly popular mode of scholarly communication: the published online object. Because the mode is still (even after decades of online DH projects) not quite solidified, ORBIS lacks a few of the basic features of common scholarly communication, and by straddling both the new and the old, ORBIS doesn’t quite live up to the best qualities of either digital or analog publication.
First of all, although their team sent a preliminary version of the site out to many people, it never went through any formal review process. Readers of this blog will know that I am no advocate of traditional publication systems or the antiquated marriage of publication and peer-review, but at this point it is worth noting that ORBIS (to my knowledge) has only been reviewed informally, by sympathetic reviewers like myself. Perhaps this means that adoption of the tool should be approached with greater caution until it is more formally reviewed by a post-publication periodical like the Journal of Digital Humanities.
That being said, the site does try remain true to humanistic and traditional publication roots. A paper version is in the works, and it is written such that we researchers can engage in the process of the tool. Unfortunately, it perhaps stays a bit too true to the paper model. The site is designed to read top-to-bottom, left-to-right, and none of the internal references to other sections include links to aid in navigation. Further, if the intent is to simultaneously allow exploration of the tool and its creation, the design does not realize this goal. The map appears at “the end” of the site, all the way on the right, and because of the layout, it is impossible to view it alongside the text describing it without opening a new window. There is quite a bit of white space to the right of the text on my wide-screen monitor – perhaps a smaller version of the tool can be embedded in that space.
One of the strengths of the project is the explicit nature of its creation. Data can be downloaded, and the sources, provenance, algorithms, and technologies are clearly stated. The model as an argument is, in short, visible and comprehensible even to those with little prior knowledge on these technologies. What this does is bridge the gap between code and humanistic inquiry, adding levels of model explication and tool-use between them. ORBIS is by far not the first project to make the creation of a tool explicit, but usually that explication is simply a public posting of the code and some limited comments or descriptions of how that code works. Unfortunately, although ORBIS does include a better bridge to explicate its argument, it does not offer the code. It’s a bit like David Copperfield explaining how he made the Statue of Liberty disappear; the explanation would certainly be helpful, but if he really wanted other people to be able to create similar illusions, he’d offer up the materials as well. (Alright, the metaphor doesn’t completely work, but stick with it.) The digital humanities seems finally to be getting into code sharing, and this is a good thing. The cost for sharing code is essentially free (although there’s a much greater price for sharing good code – all the extra time spent marking it up and making it pretty), and the benefits should go without saying: More things like ORBIS, much faster. Better tools built collectively and suiting all our individual needs.
The last, most important, and most difficult of my desires deals with uncertainty. There’s been a lot of talk about data uncertainty in the humanities lately, not least of which stemming from Stanford, the home university of ORBIS. It’s a difficult problem to solve, but presented as it is, the ORBIS project lends itself to the varieties of critiques common in the work of Johanna Drucker and others. How do you know that these were the shortest routes? What about missing information? What about the fact that every bit of travel was its own experience, with different human and environmental factors playing in, perhaps delays for sick relatives or mutineering seamen? These questions are swept under the table when ORBIS presents one route and one set of numbers per query: here, this is the fastest route, these are the cities, this is how much it would cost. The visualization and end-products create an illusion of certainty in the data, although in the text, the makers are quick to point out that a researcher should not take it as certain. One solution, and this extends to all data-driven DH projects, is to model uncertainty in the data from the ground up. How much more certain is one route than another? How certain are you of the weather in one location compared to the weather elsewhere? This sort of information flows naturally into models of Bayesian data analysis, and would allow ORBIS to deliver a list of credible routes, revealing which parts of those routes are more or less certain, and including other information like the probability of a ship being lost at sea on a particular route. Of course, data uncertainty is only part of the problem, and this would only be a partial solution.
This isn’t the place to detail exactly how uncertainty should be modeled in the data, and exactly what ought to be done with it, but the fact is there is already rich knowledge in the model and in the data available dealing with the uncertainty of travel, but that information disappears as soon as it is presented in the map interface. If ORBIS represents the next step in humanities tool production, it doesn’t quite (yet) live up to the promise of humanities data analysis, impressive as their analysis is. There is still not yet a clear enough representation of uncertainty and interpretation to reach that goal. To be fair, I’ve yet to see a single project living up to that promise at anything close to large-scale; the tools just haven’t been developed yet. Perhaps that promise is impossible at large scale, although I certainly hope that is not the case.
Despite my long list of rough edges and desiderata, I still stand by my statement that this tool is an exemplar of a shift in digital humanities projects. The tool itself is profoundly impressive and will prove useful for a variety of research, but what stands out from the humanities standpoint is the explicit nature of the ORBIS underbelly. It blurs the line between tool and argument. There are other profoundly impressive and useful tools out there (topic modeling comes to mind). However, with topic modeling, the assumptions are still obscure to the unfamiliar, despite my own best efforts and the even better efforts of others. This is because the software topic modeling is packaged with, the software we use to run the analyses, does not simultaneously engage in the process of its own creation in the way that ORBIS does. Going forward, I predict the most used (or at least the most useful) digital tools for humanists will include that engagement, rather than existing as black boxes out of which results spring forth, fully armed and ready to battle as Athena from Zeus’s forehead. ORBIS is by no means the first to attempt such a feat but, I think, it is as-yet the most successful.
 
Welcome to the scottbot irregular. My name’s Scott, and the US Government has for some reason seen fit to give me money to study Science. It’s ‘Science’ with a capital ‘S’ because I’m not studying individual aspects of the world using science, but rather studying Science in general as a social, historical, philosophical, and intellectual phenomenon. What’s worse, I’m attempting to do it scientifically. This blog is my attempt at giving the country its money’s worth. Also, I kinda would love feedback on my eventual dissertation. See? Everybody wins.
scott b. weingart
is pretty clueless about a lot of things. This is his attempt to be less so.
I pledge to be a good scholarly citizen. This includes:
Opening all data generated by me for the purpose of a publication at the time of publication.
Opening all code generated by me for the purpose of a publication at the time of publication.
Freely distributing all published material for which I have the right, and fighting to retain those rights in situations where that is not the case.
Fighting for open access of all materials worked on as a co-author, participant in a grant, or consultant on a project.
I pledge to support open access by:
Only reviewing for journals which plan to release their publications openly.
Donating to free open source software initiatives where I would otherwise have paid for proprietary software.
Citing open publications if there is a choice between two otherwise equivalent sources.
I pledge never to let work get in the way of play.
I pledge to give people chocolate occasionally if I think they’re awesome.
_
[This is somewhat out of date. Please stand by for new information!]
Hello World!
Student of History & Philosophy of Science and Information Science at Indiana University.
You’ve managed to stumble across my little corner of the internet. I’m currently a student and researcher in the HPS and SLIS departments at IUB under two of the most interesting and capable professors I’ve had the fortune to meet: Colin Allen and Katy Börner. I studied history of science and computer engineering at UF, where I slaved researched for the infinitely patient Robert A. Hatch, who taught me more in four short years than I’d yet learned in aggregate over my entire life.
Early InPhO Concept Map
These days, I split my time between classes, the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO) and the Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science Center (CNS). At InPhO I program and design visual, navigable representations of our dynamically generated taxonomy of ideas; analyze relational networks (influenced, disagreed with, etc.) from our Thinkers database; and map and compare philosophical ontologies. The CNS keeps me busy with all sorts of scientometric analyses, and I am also involved in the development of large scale network analysis software such as the NWB, creating workflows, providing software feedback, writing documentation and teaching workshops.
Co-authorship network created using the Network Workbench Tool
Research
How do changes in communication structures and technologies affect scientific discourse and collaboration?
Science is totally rad. So I study it.
There are all sorts of ways to study science, of course, and you can’t leave out even one if you want to understand Science as a whole. That means taking a look at its philosophy, history, anthropology, culture and all sorts of other things as well (perhaps even sociology!). It also means looking at (gasp) the science itself, because no self-respecting scholar should claim to understand physics and physicists without being able to calculate the distance the bullet travels before it falls.
My overarching research is in modeling and mapping the growth of science on a large scale – thematically, geographically and temporally – hoping eventually to reveal what conditions yield the most rapid rate of discovery and innovation. Looking back, we see times when scientific progress lurches forward at alarming rates, times when studies come to a halt, times when great minds exposit to deaf ears. Sometimes the reasons are obvious: burned libraries, overthrown empires, new sources of funding, technological breakthroughs, wars that need to be won. But these are heavy brush-strokes painted across the canvas of history.
If we could somehow view the whole of scientific endeavors for the last thousand years, across every topic and in every city, with the same fine granularity used to research modern-day science, imagine how much we could learn. By zooming out and looking for “hot spots” of innovation in the history of science, and by understanding the environment in which these hot spots formed, we can learn how to induce those same ideal conditions in modern day research.
If the synthesis of new ideas in physics tends to come from young researchers working on their own and with backgrounds in other fields, funds can be allotted to make sure more of those exist. If medical innovations come fastest when small groups of experts collaborate, or if science in general runs smoother in small-world type collaborative networks rather than completely connected networks, that information can be used to focus funding in just the right way to improve the rate of innovation.
The closest we can come to that fine granularity, to understanding science across contexts, is by using as many research tools as we can find. We must be comfortable working in whatever discipline with whatever methodology is necessary to find the answers sought. Huge historical data sets will be a must. Scientometricians and others in related fields do an amazing job of learning the structure of modern science, but that structure is necessarily bound to the mediums it inhabits. Modern science is a beast of national laboratories, e-mails, universities, cited journals, click-throughs, conferences and page hits.
Marshall McLuhan may or may not have been correct when he claimed “the medium is the message,” but there is no doubt that the medium plays a large role in how science is adopted, disseminated and studied. That role cannot be understood without stepping back and viewing all of the alternatives – correspondences, scientific societies, book transcriptions, etc.
Dutch Republic of Letters created in collaboration with The Huygens Instituut
The task, then, is to collect as much data as possible, as far back as we can. We should track where books traveled within Medieval Europe and Asia; who corresponded with whom, how often, and about what during the Early Modern period; who taught whom and where scientists studied; how many books were published in what languages; what universities had copies of which journals; where shared resources traveled.
This is an impossible amount of data, of course, and can only exist if created collaboratively and in the spirit of openness. These are not ideas to be copyrighted – they are numbers and data points, and they should be accessible and compatible and aggregated in one place. A History of Science Data Commons, so to speak. More on that project coming soon.
Trying to understand all of it at once is a big task… and absolutely impossible.  I’ve sliced myself two pieces of the pie that are hopefully manageable and definitely inseparable:
Periods of rapid scientific production and progress.
Inflection points in scientific communication and collaboration.
Changes in communication structures and technologies obviously affect scientific progress deeply, and it is exactly what those effects are that I hope to uncover. Scientific revolutions and media revolutions, what a tired subject! Well, perhaps, but there are two very good reasons they’re overstudied: they’re terribly important, and nobody’s got them right yet.
Interests
Courtney and I contact juggling
Thankfully for my friends and family I do not work 24/7. When not working, I can often be found juggling, attending renaissance festivals, geocaching, camping, campaigning for rationality, and reading science fiction & fantasy novels. When I feel guilty about not working, but not enough to actually get back to work, I read about physics, cognitive science and linguistics. I am also perpetually writing a history of the obscure art of contact juggling.
Juggling has been a big part of my life for nearly a decade now; I was president of Objects in Motion (UF Juggling Club) for a few years and brought the club from 3 to 30 active members, taught lessons at Groovolution dance studio, and performed with Circle & Spice in Bloomington. I’m now involved in the IU Juggling Club and juggle irregularly at the Bloomington Farmer’s Market. I have performed as far north as Calgary, as far east as Amsterdam, as far west as Los Angeles, all the way south in Miami, and all sorts of places in between.
None of that would have been possible without my good friends and co-performers in the Spherocity contact juggling troupe: Matt, Jay, Cory, Courtney, Steve, and Leighanna. Thanks to Nick, Nicole, Leah, Ian and the rest of the crew, Objects in Motion keeps growing larger and better and I miss them terribly. And if you’re reading this, Sierra, you should start juggling again.
Juggling knives in Calgary
As if there’s not enough on my plate already, I’m also involved in two wonderful pseudo-academic organizations. I co-founded Sophosessions with Warren C. Moore, the coolest cat I know, in my junior year at UF. The group still meets a little more than monthly and allows its two-dozen members to present talks on whatever they feel like, from Chinese calligraphy to Zen Buddhism to advanced fractal mathematics to building robots. Then everyone goes to Ben & Jerry’s. I still webcast into meetings whenever I can, but it’s just not the same without the ice-cream.
The Venerable IU Beer & Algorithms Club fills two Monday nights a month, and I get to listen to a bunch of Computer Science and Math graduates present their favorite algorithms in gory detail, all while eating a tasty meal and enjoying an equally tasty beverage. What could be better?