Since I work in the CDLR, I get to raise all kinds of wild questions that don’t fall into the purview of traditional, disciplinary bound scholarship. To prepare for my presentation at the Pop Conference (instituted by Experience Music Project in Seattle), this year combined with IASPM-US (International Association for the Study of Popular Music), I became preoccupied with the question: “How do I visualize a music analysis about space and place?”
My paper extends my dissertation work on The Kominas, a South Asian American punk band tied to the alternative Muslim subculture self-labeled as Taqwacore. In this paper, I chose to focus on the band’s music. Through a couple of song readings, I investigate the form and content of diasporic spaces as articulated by the band’s music. I argue that this unique geo-musical formation discursively moves seamlessly between a conventional notion of diaspora—migration of people away from an ancestral homeland—and a minority-centered, multi-diasporic space. Through a recent engagement with multimodal scholarship, I challenged myself to think beyond writing, a mode that conventionally represents academic work. I already use the concepts such as cartography and mapping as metaphors. Why should I limit the expression of my ideas to text only? Why not create a map of my music analysis especially since it’s about space and place?
Visualizing a musical analysis is nothing new. Music theorists have used music notations to represent sonic patterns key in their interpretation. More recently, theorists and information scientists used computational means to process sonic materials for patterns. Visualization became a way to explore patterns, bringing sounds into a (visual) domain that were previously inaccessible with the human senses.
My paper, however, does not engage with the use of the computational technologies to process sonic materials. It does something rather old-school. It simply draws several points on a map and then links them. It does not overlay demographic or musical data. It displays a couple of different geographical formations that illustrate the changing contour of a musical diaspora, a geographical space comprised of lyrical, sonic, and choreographic references. [I deployed Josh Kun’s concept of “audiotopia” to argue for the social and cultural effects of this geo-musical space.]
I began with a hand-drawn map. I used the Penultimate app on my iPad.
I quickly realized that my hand drawn diagram is not only messy but almost illegible. Through searching and playing, I settled with the web-based mapping program Scribble Maps to map this unique diasporic spaces. Using features such as vector graphics, media imports, and baselayer settings, I created a couple of maps that best approximate the geo-musical entities for which I argue in my analysis.
This map articulates The Kominas’ worldview. I positioned South Asia in a visually central spot, with the cultural region of Punjab and the city of Lahore highlighted. The song “Par Desi” articulates this geographical formation:
The song’s title explicitly figures the South Asian diaspora. Vocally and lyrically, the song evokes an ethnic and geographical quandary. The singer and bassist Basim’s voice shivers as he sings the chorus line, ‘In Lahore it’s raining water, in Boston it rains boots.’ The subject in the song defines his physical home in Boston, where he experienced an assault by skinhead punks. He sings, ‘They tried to stomp me out, but they only fueled the flame.’ The song narrates a history of migration and the emotions of displacement. It raises the questions, ‘Where do I point to blame, when men scatter like moths? /… how’d I get here, from a land with long monsoons?’
The song’s references to traditional bhangra, a dance music genre that originated in Punjab, further complicates this geo-musical formation. In my analysis, I argue that the band projects a transnational bhangra-punk sound:
An 8-second analog sample of live bhangra percussion comes into the musical present. Immediately, this sample transports me, the listener, away from the emotional space of the lament. Continuing the triplet pattern of the bhangra sample, the band transforms the bhangra rhythm into a collective punk-style chanting of ‘la-la-la’ in the final section of the song. This chant rejoices in the form of a Clash-like punk choir, roughly in unison with a distorted guitar.
Audio clip: Adobe Flash Player (version 9 or above) is required to play this audio clip. Download the latest version here. You also need to have JavaScript enabled in your browser.
This bhangra-punk aesthetic is projected from a South-Asian- or desi-identified ethnic space: imagined somewhere between Punjab, 1970s punk England, and present-day home in the northeastern United States. The Kominas, I contend, elides its physical home in Boston and the U.S.; at the same time, the band self-consciously embeds itself into historical punk England to reclaim a new musical home.
I discovered a different but related diasporic configuration in “Tunnnnnn.” This song articulates a minoritarian, multi-diasporic space.
The Kominas alludes to the original roots reggae version of the song (“Armagideon Time” Jamaican artist by Willi Williams). In doing so, the band resituates their version of the song into a Rastafari time-space. The Kominas locates its own battleground, while borrowing from the Rastafari visions of Armageddon.
I hear The Kominas calling for its own ‘Armagideon,’ in the new lyrics written in Punjabi. According to Basim’s translation, the first verse states: ‘We will only drink that / That they are drinking in Iraq / We will only drink that / that they would drink in Karballah (sic).’ It is not a coincidence that both Iraq and Karbala are iconic battle sites both in the past and present. The War in Iraq after the events on September 11 has been a topical preoccupation by The Kominas since its first album (entitled Wild Nights in Guantanamo Bay). The band has made clear its stance of castigating the western world, in particular the United States, for waging a war motivated by Islamophobia, militarism, and imperialism. Following the Punjabi lyrics, Basim evokes the overthrow of 21st century Babylonians. In English, he sings the lines, ‘A lot of people won’t get justice tonight / A lot of people wont’ get no supper tonight / Just remember to / Kick it over / And praise Jehovah / And kick it out.’
Audio clip: Adobe Flash Player (version 9 or above) is required to play this audio clip. Download the latest version here. You also need to have JavaScript enabled in your browser.
The Kominas’ musical alliance with roots reggae, the music of those in Jamaica as well as the Jamaican immigrants, rewrites the history of the racial dynamics in 1960s and 1970s England. Challenging the history of “paki-bashing” in England, The Kominas’ music prominently figures the South Asian subjectivity. This musical geography has discursively reorganized the racial relations between blackness, whiteness, and Asianness. It also forges a musical alliance between a South Asian American band and the Afro-Caribbeans in Jamaica and the U.K..
In its overlays, these maps bring into relief various sites of geopolitics related to postcolonial struggles. This spatial articulation, I contend, is a minority-centered project of reterritorialization. It points away from the band’s physical home in the United States to re-focus on geographical sites symbolic of resistance. Its identification with loci of anti-white-supremacy and anti-imperialism, I argue, is a response to the post-9/11 social alienation and melancholia. Through the creative adaptations of Punjabi musical roots and transnational routes via the U.K., Jamaica, and Lahore, the band has built a psycho-social home in its music.
Coda: These two maps are extensions of my work at UVa’s Scholars’ Lab where I made a series of Myspace friendship distribution maps of a handful of bands (including The Kominas) featured in my dissertation. I’m happy that I’m in the position to use experimental and digital methods to further my explorations of the relationship between pop music and postcolonial geography. This cluster of ideas and modes of inquiry truly excites me.
 
I organize my current performance projects by my over-arching curiosity in “noise.” Noise, the way I understand it, is defined in opposition to “music” as sounds legitimized by major social institutions; noise is that which challenges the existing soundscape as shaped by institutional forces, in my case, commercialism and Euro-ameri-centrism. View/read my video paper about how I conceptualize the relationship between my performance (with Dzian!), ethnographic research, and public scholarship.
With my nakashi surf rock band Dzian!, we usher in the obscure sounds of 1960s-70s surf and garage rock records from Taiwan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Japan, France, Finland, and other parts of the world less associated with rock music. In Pinko Communoids, I work to redefine the usage of conventional rock music instruments such as electric guitar, effects, and amps. My duo project Grapefruit Experiment invites collaborators across genres and extended the mode of experimental music performance into more conventional rock and popular music settings. Outside the context of these projects, I have collaborated with Tomie Hahn, Kenneth Yates (Caustic Castle), Bob Holub, and others.
Dzian! :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Dzian!/贊! (pronounced “ze-an”) revives the ecstasy of vintage rock sound from Asia. The band curates and masters the style of Taiwanese a-go-go, Japanese eleki, Indo-rock, Thai disco and shadow music, Malaysian pop yeh yeh, Khmer pop, Middle Eastern bellydance surf, and Ventures hits enjoyed by Taiwanese puppetry bands and audiences. No gimmicks, only geeks. The band embodies Taiwanese “super-cool” by recreating Nakasi (那卡西), down-home, “fashionable” party music in pre-WWII Taiwan. Committed to spectaculars, Dzian! flaunts feather boas, LEDs, authentic costumes, and choreographed belly and go-go dance, while unabashedly delivering tunes in ten languages and counting. From Chinese buffets and shopping malls in Virginia to Manhattan’s Union Square and Taiwan Center in Flushing, the band has left a trail of joyous red boa feathers. Put on your swell dancing shoes, your thumbs up, and say, “Dzian!”
dzian.info
twitter.com/dzianband
 myspace.com/dzianband
Pinko Communoids ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Pinko Communoids is an improvisational trio based in Charlottesville, Virginia. I started the project with two other UVa graduate students: Carey Sargent (PhD candidate, Sociology), Kevin Parks (PhD candidate, Computer Composition and Technologies program). We create both free and structured improvisations using conventional instruments including guitars, accordions and percussion, found objects, circuits, microphones, and other electronics. We enjoy the quiet interplay of small sounds and often employ a restrained sonic palette of diverse timbres. Since forming in 2006, Pinko Communoids have given over 40 performances both locally and abroad, including a tour of Taiwan’s major cities in Summer 2007. We have been featured at Feminist Theory and Music (FT&M10) conference, 804noise showcases, Red Room, COMA @ ABC No Rio, Sonic Circuits, Noise in the System, Technosonics, and other concert series. We helped curate a series entitled Audio January and Audio February at The Bridge PAI in Charlottesville VA.
Pinkos.info
myspace.com/pinkocommunoids
Grapefruit Experiment ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Grapefruit Experimentis a semi-open music project with Carey Sargent and Wendy Hsu as core members. The concept behind Grapefruit Experiment is inspired by Yoko Ono’s design of the Plastic Ono Band – a nomenclature designated for Carey, Wendy, and whomever they are making music with at the moment. Aesthetically they lean toward something like: part-no-wave, part-noise, part-improvised, part-avant, part-sound-fetish, part-song-like, part-fun, part-geeky + whatever parts contributed by collaborator.
grapefruitexperiment.wordpress.com
For the Society of Ethnomusicology meeting in 2011, I created a video that addresses the role of my role as a perform-scholar, instead of a traditional academic paper presentation. This is a 3-part video. In the first part of the video, I discuss my intention to raise the visibility of Asian and Asian American music. I also introduce the medium of the piece – a YouTube video – to enable my messages to spread virally and to give a shout out to the Asian and Taiwanese American stars on YouTube. [Note on the soundtrack: I played the sound of an academic talk and experimental noise to express the disruptive aim of this piece with the respect to the social and cultural invisibility of Asian and Taiwanese Americans]
…
Part two of the video opens with a story about the Taiwanese American support for the Typhoon Morakot relief efforts for Taiwan. It highlights TaiwaneseAmerican.org for organizing the relief efforts of Taiwanese American musicians, artists, and writers. Inspired by these relief efforts, particularly those of Susan and Emily Hsu of Exit Clov and the Hsu-nami, I organized a benefit concert in my town, Charlottesville, a small college town in central Virginia, bringing together the University of Virginia and the local Taiwanese community. My band Dzian! came together for the purpose of delivering the uber-fun, spectacular performance highlighting the Taiwanese style of Nakashi. The rest of this portion follows the story of how Dzian! spreads the love for the sound of rock and pop music from 1960s and 1970s Taiwan and its neighboring countries such as Japan, Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, and Cambodia.
…
In the last part of the video, I bring the “cultural work” of Dzian! to bear on its social mission of boosting the awareness of Taiwanese and Asian music in North America. I close the video by telling the story of an exchange I had with an older audience member at our performance at the first annual Hello! Taiwan Rocks concert at the Taiwan Center in Flushing. This conversation reminds me of the power of music in creating communities, spaces of comfort to which we, as Taiwanese/Asian Americans could feel like we belong to.
…
I hope that this video will continue to inspire others — musicians, artists, writers, journalists, academics, and other cultural workers, as well as the working and non-working professionals — to get behind the mission of creating a space of comfort and strength for Taiwanese and Asian Americans.
[The content on this page was originally posted as a feature story on TaiwaneseAmerican.org.]
Wendy Hsu is Mellon Digital Scholarship Postdoctoral Fellow in the Center of Digital Learning & Research at Occidental College. She received her PhD in the Critical and Comparative Studies in Music program in the McIntire Department of Music at the University of Virginia. Her research interests lie at the intersection of popular music performance and the transnational contacts between Asia and America, focusing on issues related to race/ethnicity, gender/sexuality, and migration. She has published on Yoko Ono, Hedwig and the Angry Inch, and Bollywood film music. Her teaching areas include music in Asian America, transnational popular musics, and race & gender in popular music. Since 2007, she has designed and taught four undergraduate courses in the Music Department and the Studies of Women and Gender Department at UVa. [More: on teaching]
Hsu’s ethnographic dissertation details the identity articulation and community formation of second and 1.5-generation Asian American musicians actively engaged in an indie rock music scene. Situating the study in the post-Civil-Rights, Obama-aged United States, this study interrogates the category of “Asian American” by examining the performances, ideology, and social networks of such musicians. This multidisciplinary study builds on the ethnomusicological studies of grassroots/popular music and adds nuance to the cultural analyses of current transnational musical production and social connections mediated by digital technologies. Hsu blogs about her 24-month-long field research at YellowBuzz. [More: on research]
An active performer, Hsu is a founding member of vintage Asian rock band Dzian!, improvised music trio Pinko Communoids, and Yoko-Ono-inspired noise duo Grapefruit Experiment. She co-founded HzCollective and organizes music and arts events at The Bridge PAI [More: on performance]
Wend Hsu’s_CV[pdf]
Press:
Areas of Focus
 Popular Music, Asia-Pacific-America, Transnationalism, media & Technology, digital humanities
My research explores transpacific musical practices in popular music genres. I study the complex hybridization of musical genres and experiences emerged between Asia and America. My research examines: How musicians of Asian affiliations (descent, residence, nationality, diaspora, etc) reinvent musical materials from existing ethnically tied musical genres; how they form social networks; and how they transform their on-stage and off-stage identities in the increasingly globalized ecology.
With the financial and intellectual support from the NEH-funded Graduate Fellowship in the Digital Humanities provided by the UVa Scholars’ Lab, I have added an exciting dimension of digital ethnography to my dissertation project – applying web-scraping techniques to map out the digital social networks of the musicians featured in my dissertation project. Read about my digital project.
Dissertation ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Redefining Asian America:
 Cultural Politics, Aesthetics, and Social Networks of Independent Rock Musicians
American rock musicians of Asian descent are finding powerful ways to express their cultural identities, despite their practical invisibility in mainstream media. This ethnographic dissertation explores the social and musical life of second and 1.5-generation Asian American musicians actively engaged in independent (indie) rock music performances. By investigating the performance, ideology, and social networks of such musicians, this study interrogates the boundaries of the “Asian American” ethnic identity and the socio-cultural imagination of “Asian America” in the post-Civil-Rights and post-9/11 United States. This dissertation argues that the musicians perform with a dynamic of ambivalence, covering, and uncovering ethnic and racial traits associated with Asian identities. This dynamic in effect contests racializations. Turning outward and eastward, the musicians stretch the confining borders of the U.S., reaching fans and fellow musicians in various sub-regions of Asia.
In these chapters, I document how the musicians leverage the Do-It-Yourself ideology, central in indie rock music scenes, to deploy self-invented ethnic notions, circumvent norms practiced by their white middle-class peers, and transform marginalizing race-related articulations. Reclaiming their outsider status, they challenge the contradictions within the discourses of liberal multiculturalism and forge bonds with others including non-Asian minority groups. This dissertation also examines various transnational musical projects connecting Asian America to a geographical and symbolic “Asia.” Through touring and media exchange via the Internet, the musicians build a set of social networks comprising a unique translocal indie rock music scene of their own. I explore this translocality by adapting web-scraping and mapping technologies from the digital humanities. Finally, I discuss the formation of my band Dzian! as a reflexive, performative response to the issues related to race, ethnicity, and melancholia raised during my fieldwork.
Dissertation Full Text Download [PDF]
Publications :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
+ Hsu, Wendy and Sargent, Carey. “Rocking Out Between the Local and the Global: Transnational Independent Music Industry in Taiwan”, Amalgam, September 2008 [download PDF].
+ Hsu, Wendy. “Review: Queering the Popular Pitch edited by Sheila Whiteley and Jennifer Rycenga,” Journal of Popular Music Studies, (September 2008) [download PDF].
+ Hsu, Wendy. “Review: Sensational Knowledge: Embodying Culture through Japanese Dance by Tomie Hahn”, Women and Music, (September 2008) [download PDF].
+ Hsu, Wendy. “Queering and Reading Plato in Hedwig and the Angry Inch“, Queer Pop Culture, ed. Peele, Thomas. Palgrave-Macmillan, May 2007 [download PDF].
+ Hsu, Wendy. “Between Narrative and Expressive, Fantasy and Melodrama in Bombay Film,” Virginia Review of Asian Studies, vol. 5 (2003) [download PDF].
I teach to raise multicultural and global awareness. My pedagogy emphasizes multiplicity of perspectives, reflexivity, and practice. Read my Teaching Statement.
Employing multi-disciplinary methods and theories from scholarship on music, media, culture, and history, I have designed and taught four undergraduate courses:
SWAG1440 Gender and Race in Popular Music, an entry-level survey course offered twice in the Study of Women and Gender Department at the University of Virginia, provides an environment for students to explore issues intersecting race, gender, and popular music via a multi-disciplinary and multimedia engagement with musical sound and culture. Through scholarly and popular readings, and reflective assignments such as the “mixtape” project and the concert report class blog, students engage with their own, immediate popular music worlds in critical and reflexive ways. [SWAG1440 sample syllabus]
As an upper-level undergraduate seminar, MUSI4510 Music in Asian Americaasks: What is the relationship between music and “Asian American” identity? More broadly, what is “Asian America” in the musical life and cultural imagination of the United States? Engaging with intensive reading, writing, and final student projects, this seminar investigates the musical sounds, icons, lives, and practices in Asian American communities in the United States in 20th and 21st century. [MUSI4510 sample syllabus]
Other courses:
MUSI207/307 World Music: Popular Music and Transnationalism
 [MUSI207/307 sample syllabus]
MUSI207 Race and Ethnicity in Popular Music
[MUSI207 sample syllabus]
MUSI/SOC255 Digital Vernacular Music-Culture