By Jeremiah McCall
Mar 21, 12
What simulation games do best as interpretations is present the past in terms of problem spaces. This is a concept I have co-opted from games and learning theorists (most notably Henry Jenkins and Kurt Squire) for use in thinking about how we teach and learn about the past and use simulation games. I have an article in the works that addresses some aspects of this, but I want to test these ideas out in the meantime. I am also inspired by the recent posts from Trevor and Rebecca and the enthusiastic feedback they generated and wanted to make some sense of that in relation to my work. Any feedback would be most welcome.
I.
The concept of problem space is a highly useful tool for studying historical simulations, teaching history, and using the former to help in the latter. Simulation games are interpretations of the past designed as problem spaces. A problem space, at least as I currently define it, has the following features:
Players, or in the physical world, agents, have roles and goals generally contextualized in space
They make choices in an effort to achieve these goals
The choices available and their success or failure are shaped by:
The affordances of the space (which can include quantifiable resources, cultural frameworks, psychological tendencies, etc.)
The constraints of the space (which can include finite quantifiable resources and scarcity, cultural frameworks, psychological tendencies, etc.)
The problem space design of a simulation game is, in some respects just a more sophisticated articulation of the basic core of game-ness. By most definitions games require players, conflict, and a quantifiable outcome. Players have affordances and constraints embodied in rules. What a historical simulation game does, however, is craft a virtual problem space that represents a real-world one.
The problem spaces in simulation games are subject to some particular constraints. One of the most important is the constraint of quantification. Simulation game programs, as computer games, must be reducible to 0s and 1s – this is the only language through which a CPU can receive orders. Consequently, all elements of a historical simulation game, including agents and their motives, must be reducible to numbers. My favorite example of this is the happiness metric found in many city-builders. This takes a very imprecise real-world concept and transforms it into a precise number that can be increased or decreased in precise ways (often through food, housing, jobs, taxes, and amenities) that have a precise effect on the city population (generally determining whether immigration or abandonment occur). Happiness, productivity, popular unrest, attack and defense strength, espionage effectiveness, cultural influence—no matter how qualitative the concept in the real-world, if it’s an actual mechanic in a game, it is strictly quantified.
Additionally problem spaces in simulation games, however open-ended they might appear, are closed. To function, these games must be working, closed systems, completely operational once the player joins the mix. As expansive as a game might be in its treatments, it will impose arbitrary limits on its subject. These limits begin with the roles and goals of the player, decisions that shape the entire design. Perhaps more problematically for critical scholars of video games, simulation games are, as games, teleological in their focus. The quantifiable gameplay elements and mechanics all, in a tightly designed game any way, factor directly into whether the player achieves their goals.
II.
There has been excellent discussion on PtP about the appropriateness of, and methods for critiquing simulations historically. Teasing out the ramifications that they are interpretations in the form of quantifiable problem spaces can provide some important insights on this issue. It suggests considerations for rigorous and meaningful criticism that is holistic and sensitive to the medium.
First of all, just like any other interpretation of the past, simulation games will select certain aspects of the past as their theme and not others. This is true of all historical interpretations—after all an interpretation that includes everything is not an interpretation at all. To be playable and appealing, a game needs to have a set of core mechanics that are tight and cohesive, modeling one overarching system well. Consider the standard genres of simulation games that have developed over time: city builders, nation management, trade, war, diplomacy, politics, etc. Though there is always room for crossovers and new genres, the existing genres of successful simulation games point to a constraint that a compelling game—just like a focused narrative or analysis—must focus on some things and neglect other things.
Because simulation games must function as working systems, however, the choice of problem space, or more specifically the choice of whose problem spaces to represent necessarily locks the game into certain portrayals of the past. Other media are not subject to the same constraints. One could easily conceive of a textual narrative/analytical work, for example, that devotes time and space to a variety of viewpoints and agencies. Still, no narrative or analysis covers all or even most viewpoints and all are subject to authorial predilections. Most importantly when considering the difference between simulations and these media, written texts are not quantitative rule sets executed by a computer to form a problem space. Even if writers wish to analyze the past in terms of problem spaces, they are free to select a variety of roles and goals that may have at times only tangential relationships. Further, they can select affordances and constraints that do not always form a complete system, and digress on important philosophical and practical comments in ways game designers simply cannot. The game designer must think in terms of a complete working simplified system in ways the writer does not. This is certainly not a bad thing when one considers the goal of designers is to entertain and interest players, After all focused games fare better than those with tacked on elements that do not contribute to the whole.
III.
All this may seem fairly obvious, but there is an important point of criticism here that is not always fully appreciated. When trying to understand why an element of a simulation exists in the way it does and what it suggests about attitudes towards the past—whether why Colonization codes native peoples the way it does, why Civilization does not deal with social issues in cities, or why East India Company does not treat the tensions between English and Indian customs—one needs to consider holistically the problem space selected by the designers. First off, one must consider the goals and roles of the human players set out by the design plan. Certainly in the real world there can be many agents in a problem space with different roles and goals that can complement, conflict, or have little bearing on one another. Simulation games, too, can represent multiple agents with varying roles and goals. In single-player games these additional roles are handled by the program’s artificial intelligence routines. In multi-player games human players can take on additional roles. Generally speaking however—and I welcome examples where this is not the case—simulation games, especially pleasurable and/or commercially successful ones must commit to a very small set of roles and goals, often one role and one goal. Even where roles and goals differ and conflict they tend to be set up as binary opposites or at least draw from the same well of resources and affordances. So both sides may want to hold a territory or win an election, one group may want independence while the other wants centralization, the city ruler wants profits while the citizens want material niceties, etc. This is in large part, again, because games must be closed functioning systems: each part must connect to every other part. So a game cannot represent roles and goals well that do not fit into the core choices, affordances, and constraints of the chosen problem space. Therefore the commitment to a particular articulation of a problem space will shape every other aspect of the game and any analysis of an element of the game, not least of all an agent, must consider the framework of the problem space.
Let’s apply bits of this theory to a concrete example. Hegemony: Philip of Macedon by Longbow Games, a real time kingdom management / strategic and tactical war game hybrid. The player assumes the role of Philip, the fourth century king who unified Macedonia, subjugated Greece, and, in the process, built the formidable military system that his son, Alexander, would use to conquer the Persian empire. Consider the portrayal of slavery in the game. When one defeats an enemy unit, the survivors can be captured and enslaved. If the survivors are not captured within a short time, they will escape. Slaves can be used to work mines, perform general construction tasks, and transport food supplies. Left untended it is possible for slaves to escape. Now, this is a reasonable sketch of aspects of slavery in the ancient world, not least of all the matter-of-fact nature of a system we find repugnant today.
Suppose, however, one wanted to criticize formally this historical representation of slaves. One might start by noting that these slaves have very little agency. Granted, they have the goal of escaping in this problem space and can do so if left unattended for too long. This goal does little more than add a constraint to the player’s problem space, a reason to take care attending to slaves and spending resources on watchtowers. This is not much of a depiction of agency at all and so slaves become nothing more than affordances, resources for the player to exploit in the game. This sort of portrayal might inspire comment and critique that even enslaved people had agency beyond escape, the ability to make choices and have a degree of ownership over their lives despite the horrible constraints of their status. (I recollect from my limited work with U.S. history that this sort of development took place in the historiography of American slavery, from first not studying slaves to studying slaves as victims, to studying slaves as agents while still recognizing the oppression of enslavement).
Why does the game not portray the agency of slaves? How Longbow defined the primary problem space, the human player’s problem space, is a critical answer. For the player Philip king of Macedon is the role with a goal of uniting Macedonia and building a Balkan empire. With this role and goal driving the articulation of the problem space, depicting slaves in the game as affordances is fully understandable. One could attempt to flesh out the slaves feelings on their situation, but it is difficult to see how that would fit into the mechanics of this particular problem space, the one the designers chose.
It is important to note, however, that saying a portrayal of ancient slaves, native Americans, Hessian mercenaries, railroad barons or any other agent or aspect of the past, takes the form it does because of the problem space is not meant to be a tactic for ending discussion or defending an implementation (One could imagine such a chilling effect: “why are they portrayed this way? Because the problem space demanded it. Oh … okay, so what’s for lunch?”). It is meant to focus criticism on a game holistically and consider how the affordances and constraints of the simulation game medium and the interests and goals of a game’s creators (their concerns, assumptions, hopes, attitudes, what have you) shape a game’s interpretation of the past. At the risk of being too meta, but in all seriousness, one really needs to consider the problem space of the game designers when considering the elements of the simulation they designed. Once the commitment has been made to make a commercial simulation game, as opposed to using any other medium of interpreting the past, the affordances and constraints of conceptualizing history as problem spaces place great pressure on the final product.
So, what kinds of questions might one ask of a simulation game as a problem space and what kinds of meaningful criticisms/evaluations can be make? A few, necessarily incomplete suggestions:
One might meaningfully question why the particular main roles and goals for the game were selected in the same way one can meaningfully question why certain generations of historians privileged one set of topics and questions over another. Indeed meaningful answers to such questions can be given based on careful research of prevailing ideas at the time. Simulation games, for example, tend to be inclined to issues of domination whether in political, military, or economic forms – discussing why this is continues to be a lively debate.
One absolutely should question whether the roles and goals selected for the players are historically legitimate. In other words, do they reflect what our evidence suggests were some important roles and goals in the past? There is little question that Philip wanted to dominate the Balkans. In other cases, such as Colonization where the goal, as stated on the Firaxis page is for colonists to “negotiate, trade and fight as they acquire great power” http://www.2kgames.com/civ4/colonization/ one might very well explore the cases in the past where this articulation of goals was and was not valid. That’s a great conversation to have, and it has great bearing on the validity of each element in the game’s interpretation of the past.
One can rightfully question why each and every element of the game is portrayed as it is. But these questions should not be divorced from the consideration of the problem space as a whole, especially the historical roles and goals conceptualized by the designers. A thorough consideration of why slaves are mere tools in Hegemony, happiness is the defining metric for success in CivCity: Rome, Indian culture is not represented in East India Company, or any other element in any game, should consider the goals set out for the game and the supporting game mechanics to be thoroughly compelling.
So, suppose that one accepts the roles and goals of a game as historically valid goals, i.e. goals that reasonably represent what good evidence suggests motivated some peoples of the past. That might well mean that a thorough challenge to the portrayal of some historical agents in the game could only be made by suggesting that:
a) That the agents could not reasonably be conceived to play that role in the problem space from the point of view of the player, the primary agent
b) By suggesting what more legitimate roles the agent could have played in the game that would mesh into a system, or at the very least not conflict with, with the player’s roles and goals in the problem space. Considerations of this sort need to be very aware to the developer’s presumed goal to create a playable, enjoyable, and commercially viable game.
c) (A variant of b) By suggesting what roles and goals non-player agents in the game could have played that would have worked in a system centered on the player’s role and goals.
Note: The day before posting I was browsing through old PtP posts I had missed, and noted happily that Trevor made comment in this spirit on Mark’s essay on Detroit. Trevor essentially agreed Mark’s critique of the absence of race in SimCity/Micropolis is valid, but asked him to suggest how he would have race represented in the game.
So challenging the portrayal of slaves in Hegemony, if I accept the historical validity of the role and goals (which I do), would require suggesting how slaves could have been portrayed more complexly and validly within the defined problem space, how they could have had a greater portrayal of agency through expanded roles and goals. This certainly can be done. Consider another nation management / strategy game, Paradox Interactive’s Europa Universalis III. One of the problems the player-ruler faces is nationalist revolts. When a nationalist revolt erupts in a territory, the rebel units besiege the territory and, if unchecked, ultimately seize control of it. When the nationalists seize the province they preventing the player from taxing it, drawing troops from it, or administering it.
 (Note I was mistaken in the characterization of the next few sentences. Check out Liam’s Burke’s comment below. Fortunately, my point was to illustrate the structure of a critique, not levy a challenge against EU III)
 What the nationalists do not do, however, is actually create an independent state, i.e. a functioning state along the lines of the hundreds of others in the game. This limits the nationalists’ agency severely, making them serve as nothing more than a constraint, rather than a fleshed out agent. Indeed once the player can commit the necessary troops to reconquering the province, it will be reintegrated into the kingdom. The designers presumably could have easily made successful nationalist revolts result in the creation of new small states; there are many states in the game, after all who only control one province. Doing so would have represented the agency of nationalists and the goals of nationalist revolts more realistically, rather than the current state of affairs where they simply lock down a player province. Such a change could mesh well with the game’s overall problem space—though there may still have been compelling design reasons not to have done so.
On a final note, it is not my intention to criticize existing game analyses, or suggest that I have fully practiced these ideals — I’m quite sure my critique of CivCity: Rome from last year did not offer specific suggestions for remodeling the game. Nor am I suggesting that thinking in terms of problem spaces is the only meaningful way to conceptualize simulation games. I’m simply reaffirming that simulation games are human interpretations of the past subject to certain constraints, as sources and media they should be considered holistically, and this can be done by thinking in terms of problems spaces. Next week, I’ll add a shorter post considering how the concept of problem spaces and the use of simulations to illustrate problem spaces can be very effective in the classroom. In the meantime, I hope this will generate some comments; there is a lot more to be said on these matters.
 
Collaboratively edited and authored, Play the Past is dedicated to thoughtfully exploring and discussing the intersection of cultural heritage (very broadly defined) and games/meaningful play (equally broadly defined). Play the Past contributors come from a wide variety of backgrounds, domains, perspectives, and motivations (for being interested in both games and cultural heritage) – a fact which is evident in the wide variety of topics we tackle in our posts.
It is very important to note that Play the Past isn’t just about the intersection of cultural heritage and digital games, its also about non-digital games (boardgames, tabletop games, collectible card games, etc.), alternate reality games (ARGs), barely games (a term originally coined by Russel Davies – no, not the Doctor Who Russel Davies – and built upon by our very own Rob McDougall), and playful mechanics (or “gamifying” as its been recently called).
We are also very interested in exploring the spectrum of approaches to games – from the more “philosophical” (as some might call it) games studies side of things, to the more practically applied serious games/meaningful play side of things (and just about everything betwixt and between).
Inspired by Profhacker
Credit where credit is due. One of the most important inspirations for Play the Past comes from directly ProfHacker. You can see the fingerprints of ProfHacker all over Play the Past. From the way we do business behind the scenes to our commenting and community policy (which is pretty much shamelessly lifted verbatim from ProfHacker). This is no great surprise as Ethan Watrall (Play the Past’s editor) was in the first batch of ProfHacker writers. In this regard, we are extremely grateful to ProfHacker – and particularly ProfHacker’s two Editors: George H. Williams (@georgeonline on Twitter) and Jason B. Jones (@jbj on Twitter).
Interested in Contributing?
Interested in contributing to Play the Past (either on a regular basis or as a “one shot” guest author)? We’d love to hear from you. Drop us a line here and tell us a little bit about yourself and how you might contribute.
We are committed to fostering an environment characterized by generosity, creativity, and (as corny as it might sound) kindness. Comments on this blog are an important part of creating that environment, and this comment policy aims to communicate our values to new readers and encourage comments that will build up the online community here.
Thoughtful comments (even when–and often especially if–disagreeing) are encouraged and appreciated.
No snark allowed (see David Denby on definition of snark). While snark certainly has its virtues, this blog provides a space for people to be inexperienced at something, or even wrong, to facilitate learning. That’s harder to do in the face of either persistent or “drive-by” snark.
Play the Past should be a community built through regular contributions made by recognized–but not necessarily “real name”–contributors. Some commenters’ identities reveal their real names; other commenters use pseudonyms. Our online identities are built from our comments here and our presence–as commenters and authors–in other places on the web, in print, at conferences. Play the Past welcomes commenters–whether anonymous, psuedonymous, or publically identified–who are committed to creating a rich and respectful dialogue. We want commenters to be able to explore the complexities of Play the Past posts; we want commenters to inquire and debate; we want everyone to be able to learn from the conversation.
Links & images are encouraged. Gratuitous linking back to your own site is discouraged. Links in the “website” field should point only to profile pages or to personal websites.
Gravatars are strongly encouraged.
Jeremy Antley
Jeremy Antley is a writer/student/gamer who received his MA in History with a focus on the Russian Imperial period from the University of Kansas in 2007. While currently in the middle of researching the immigration of Russian Old Believers to Oregon in the mid-60′s for his doctoral ambitions, Jeremy also finds studying the life and culture of Russian peasants to be a fascinating topic. He looks at topics of digital culture, games and, of course, Russian history at his blog, Peasant Muse. Those interested in hearing the twitter ramblings of someone crazy enough to love Russian peasants would do well to check-out Jeremy’s handle- @jsantley. Having played many epic games of Axis & Allies as an undergraduate, Jeremy now plays a variety of board and console (xbox 360) games with his friends in his current residence of Portland, Oregon. Jeremy’s love of board games informs his current interest in how players modify their games and how looking at board games as platforms can inform historical inquiries.
Kevin Ballestrini
Kevin Ballestrini teaches Latin and Mythology at the Norwich Free Academy in Connecticut. He has received an M.A. and B.A. in Classics from the University of Colorado and University of Connecticut respectively. In addition to experience teaching in a traditional classroom setting, Kevin is deploying the first fully practomimetic introductory language course at the high school level this year in a section of Latin I. He hopes that the experience will enhance student engagement and connection to life and culture in ancient Rome. As an avid technology enthusiast, he maintains his blog, Techna Virumque Cano (http://kevinbal.blogspot.com) where he discusses the intersection of technology and his teaching. Kevin is also the leader of a Lord of the Rings Online kinship and has a great interest in exploring how games contribute to the development of (online) communities just as the bardic tradition contributed to the development of ancient communities. You can also find Kevin on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/kballestrini.
Emily Joy Bembeneck
Emily Bembeneck is a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Michigan in the Department of Classical Studies. She primarily works on narrative and character development in ancient epic and modern video games, both graphical and text-based. Other interests of hers include the image of the hero, Greek tragedy and social catharsis, cultural and individual identity through play, immersion, and game design, She teaches classes in Latin, Greek and Roman history, ancient war and entertainment, among other things related to the Classical world She is an active contributor at http://www.greywardens.com where she writes on the narrative structure of Bioware’s Dragon Age RPG franchise. Her current projects include working on images of Rome in ancient and modern culture, developing a Flash-based application that combines components of social play with narrative creation, and designing a Dragon Age module that explores Euripides’ Medea through post-primary narrative. When not being all academic and studious, she is likely either playing an elf in some virtual world or spending time with her two young sons. Find her online at Ada Play and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/adarel.
Andrew D. Devenney
Andrew D. Devenney is currently a Visiting Assistant Professor of World History at Grand Valley State University in Allendale, Michigan. A life-long and avid gamer of both video and role-playing games, Andrew has found elements of game-based learning, new media, and the digital humanities unconsciously seeping into his classroom over the last few years. As such, he has begun to experiment relentlessly on his students with these new ideas, techniques, and shiny toys, and is having a grand time doing it. Sometime in the relatively near future, Andrew hopes to deploy a new course that will explore global history through the medium of gaming (which means the class may very well morph into a giant, heavily modded, credit-based game of Dungeons and Dragons). Andrew can be found online at http://andrewdevenney.net and on Twitter as @adevenney.
Shawn Graham
Shawn Graham is Assistant Professor of Digital Humanities in the Department of History at Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada. He’s been blogging as ‘The Electric Archaeologist‘ since 2007, documenting his interest & experiments in game-based learning, agent based modeling, and other aspects of digital media for archaeological teaching and research. On Twitter, he’s at http://www.twitter.com/electricarchaeo. He’s published amongst other things a number of agent-based simulations on aspects of the Roman world, and has explored using Civilization mods in his distance-education classrooms. He received his PhD in Archaeology from the University of Reading in 2002, where he was interested in complexity & evolving networks in antiquity (especially in Rome). When he’s not geeking out over the latest tech toys or things archaeological, he is chief cider maker at Coronation Hall Cider Mills and playing Wii games with his family. If only there was wiiCivilization…
Matthew Kirschenbaum
Matthew Kirschenbaum is Associate Professor in the Department of English at the University of Maryland, Associate Director of the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH, an applied thinktank for the digital humanities), and Director of Digital Cultures and Creativity, a new “living/learning” program in the Honors College. Kirschenbaum speaks and writes often on topics in the digital humanities and new media; his work has received coverage in the Atlantic, New York Times, National Public Radio, Wired, Boing Boing, Slashdot, and the Chronicle of Higher Education. He has been pushing cardboard counters around on hexagonal grids since his early teens. See http://www.mkirschenbaum.net for more.
Katy Meyers
Katy Meyers is a graduate student in the Department of Anthropology,with a concentration in mortuary archaeology, at Michigan StateUniversity. She is currently a fellow in both the Cultural Heritage Informatics Initiative and the Campus Archaeology Program. She is also an editor of GradHacker, and the game designer for an Ancient Egyptbased mod of Civilization V. When she somehow finds free time she loves playing first person shooter and adventure video games, and is amajor fan of Milton-Bradley board game classics. She’s interested inthe role of games for outreach and education in archaeology and cultural heritage, as well as the biases they create. Katy can befound online at her blog http://www.bonesdontlie.com and on Twitter at @bonesdonotlie.
Jeremiah McCall
Jeremiah McCall has been teaching high school history for the past decade, mostly at Cincinnati Country Day School. His first professional love is high school teaching, especially designing instructional strategies that will engage and challenge his students to learn and grow. In addition to more conventional courses, Jeremiah also teaches senior elective on (tabletop) historical simulation design, and the intersection of serious games and contemporary global issues. Jeremiah’s primary training is in history with a PhD in ancient history from Ohio State University; he authored a book on the cavalry of the Roman Republic and is currently writing a historical biography of the Roman aristocrat M. Claudius Marcellus to be published by Pen and Sword press. He has recently completed a guidebook for teachers who wish to use simulation games in the history class. Titled Gaming the Past: Using Video Games to Teach Secondary History, the book was published by Routledge in June, 2011. As an extension of his teaching philosophy — that history is primarily the study and evaluation of competing interpretations of the past — McCall has conducted numerous classroom implementations of historical simulations as historical interpretations. He maintains the website gamingthepast.net, one of the primary sites devoted to the use of historical simulations in classroom teaching. He also plays far more video games — particularly RPGs and strategy — than you’d think he could find time for.
Rob MacDougall
Rob MacDougall is Assistant Professor of History at the University of Western Ontario and Associate Director of UWO’s Centre for American Studies, where he teaches United States history, the history of technology, and digital history methods. His research centers on the history of communication–he has just written a book on the early days of the telephone and is beginning a new book on the circulation of bad ideas. He blogs sporadically at Old is the New New and is on the Twitter at http://twitter.com/robotnik. A life-long gamer, Rob is interested in the history of gaming and in using games and play to encourage more playful historical thinking. His own play is largely non-digital of late–tabletop RPGs with his gamer buddies and make-believe with his kids–but he looks forward to seeing how good computer games will have gotten by the time he gets tenure.
Rebecca Mir
Rebecca Mir is a museum educator, researcher, and writer at various institutions in New York City. She will receive an M.A. in Decorative Arts, Design History, and Material Culture from the Bard Graduate Center in May 2012. She received her Bachelor’s degree in Art History from Indiana University of Pennsylvania in 2010. She often thinks about how (and why) artifacts and cultures are (mis)represented in video games and how museums are using games to engage and educate audiences. Rebecca can be found on Twitter as @hellenophile.
Trevor Owens
Trevor Owens is a digital archivist with the National Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program (NDIIP) at the Library of Congress and a doctoral student in the Graduate School of Education at George Mason University. Before joining the Library of Congress he worked as the community lead for the Zotero project at the Center for History and New Media helped organize the first two meetings of the Games, Learning, and Society Conference. He received a bachelors degree in the history of science form the University of Wisconsin, and a masters degree in American History with and emphasis on digital history from George Mason University. Trevor has spent considerable amounts of time playing all iterations of Civilization, but is also a big fan of role playing games (everything from Earthbound to Fallout). Trevor has published on the history of children’s books about Einstein and Curie, the discursive practices of Civ Modders, and the role of digital research tools in scholarship and teaching. When not researching, writing, or gaming, he also enjoys playing the violin. Trevor can be found online at http://www.trevorowens.org and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/tjowens
Roger Travis
Roger Travis is an Associate Professor of Classics in the Department of Literatures, Cultures & Languages of the University of Connecticut. He is also the Director of the Video Games and Human Values Initiative at UConn, an interdisciplinary online nexus for scholarly activities like monthly symposia and “playversations.” He received his Bachelor’s degree in classics from Harvard College, and his Ph.D. in comparative literature from the University of California, Berkeley before arriving at UConn in 1997. He has published on Homeric epic, Greek tragedy, Greek historiography, the 19th C. British novel, HALO, and the massively-multiplayer online role-playing game He has been President of the Classical Association of New England and of the Classical Association of Connecticut. He writes the blog Living Epic about the fundamental connection between ancient epic and the narrative video game, and is a founder and contributor of the collaborative blog Play the Past. In the 2009-2010 academic year, Roger offered the first courses ever designed entirely as practomimes.
Mark Sample
Mark Sample is an Assistant Professor of contemporary literature and new media studies in the Department of English at George Mason University. In addition to his work on electronic literature, videogames, and code studies, Mark is an outspoken advocate of open source pedagogy and open source research. In recognition of his commitment to innovation in teaching, Mark was the recipient of George Mason’s 2010 Teaching Excellence Award. Mark is a regular contributor to ProfHacker, and can also be found online at samplereality.com or on Twitter as @samplereality.
Ethan Watrall
Ethan Watrall is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Anthropology and Associate Director of Matrix:The Center for Humane Arts, Letters & Social Sciences Online at Michigan State University. In addition, Ethan is a Principal Investigator in the Games for Entertainment & Learning Lab, and co- founder of both the undergraduate Specialization and Game Design Development and the MA in Serious Game Design at Michigan State University. Ethan teaches (and has taught) in a wide variety of areas including cultural heritage informatics, ancient Egyptian social history & archaeology, archaeology and pop culture, user centered & user experience design, game design, serious game design, game studies. and history of various forms of popular and entertainment media (comics and digital games to name a few). When he’s not being all professorial, he’s a world class comic book nerd (Killowog is so his favorite Green Lantern), a sci-fi dork (he’ll argue to the grave that Tom Baker is the best Doctor ever), and an avid player of all sorts of games (digital, board, and tabletop). Ethan can be found online at http://www.captainprimate.com, and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/captain_primate