By Katy Meyers
Feb 28, 12
A certain amount of knowledge is required for players to navigate video games, whether this means remembering the weak points of the different splicers in BioShock, or remembering the buttons to press to play Epona’s song in Ocarina of Time. This knowledge is gained throughout play, rather than presented to the individual to quiz them, however when the knowledge is required it can drastically affect how well the player performs. As Adam discussed in his post on the role of content and form in historical video games, there are often problems of balancing the mechanics and form with content. While the game itself is more fun, it is at the sake of historical accuracy. He proposes that we should create games in which the player is engaging with the historical content rather than passively interacting with it. In a previous post on Assassin’s Creed, I argued a similar point, noting that the content needed to be part of the form and structure of game play. In designing meaningful or educational games, it is this dynamic knowledge that we need to tap into to create games that teach players about the content, but not at the sake of the game mechanics or fun.
I am currently the lead game designer for Ethan’s NEH game, Red Land Black Land. The game is a mod of Sid Meier’s Civilization V, and is based on a series of six scenarios. Each scenario plays through a portion of a period in Ancient Egypt. The purpose of the game is three fold: allow players to explore the process of historical and social change from the Pre-Dynastic to end of the New Kingdom, explore the construction of knowledge about each period, and provide a counter-point to mainstream understanding of Ancient Egypt.
One of the problems with teaching Ancient Egypt is that there exists a wide range of interpretations in archaeology and Egyptology. Each discipline tends to privilege specific information over other. In archaeology the material culture is privileged, interpreted as a direct reflection of the actions of individuals in the past. In Egyptology the text, epigraphy and inscriptions are paramount, being that they are the words of the individuals who lived in the past. To make matters more confusing, interpretations of inscriptions and archaeological sites change over time, and are subject to the biases of the interpreters. While having a knowledge of the time period, culture, politics, economy and social structures is important, it is vital for students to understand how this information has been created, especially when there are disagreements. One example is the question of how the Kingdom of Egypt was formed. Egyptologists argue that the kingdom was united through warfare based on a number of palettes depicting warriors, whereas archaeologists argue for a slow amalgamation of the various smaller groups with increasing trade between them creating cultural homogeneity. There is a lack of material culture which points to warfare, such as the presence of mass graves or even high numbers of weapons. It is necessary for students to know how this highly contested knowledge is constructed.
The question was how to convey not just a single educational strand of information, but a number of conflicting strands of information. Most meaningful games focus on a single topic, with the goal to memorize the content and use the information to pass to a different level. How do you get players to learn a number of different interpretations and then use that knowledge to make historical choices while still being engaged in the game mechanics?
In order to achieve this, we embedded the knowledge into four historical learning agents. In Civ V, the player has access to four advisors who give them hints and advice on how to proceed in economics, foreign affairs, military campaigns and science. In Red Land Black Land, the player is advised by different academics who share their knowledge of the time period. These historical learning agents include an archaeologist from the late 19th century whose conclusions are based on theories of diffusion and seriation, a 21st century archaeologist who uses a range of modern sites and techniques to interpret material culture, an Egyptologist who focuses on epigraphy and inscriptions, and a graduate student who is, like the player, navigating the different streams of knowledge.
The player needs to properly interpret the knowledge in order to make decisions about how they will proceed in the game. One problem that continues to plague the design is that we, as developers, are privileging one interpretation over another. The development and design is in the hands of two archaeologists, so there is a clear bias on what interpretations we believe the player should follow in order to win. This doesn’t mean that they can’t win if they choose to follow the advice of the Egyptologist, and in some cases it may be the appropriate choice. Due to the game being a mod, there are limits on the number of potential winning narratives, which forces us as developers to pick a ‘more correct’ version of history. Regardless, the player will be required to interact with different strands of dynamic knowledge and make decisions based on this in order to play. When testing begins in the next couple weeks we will see whether this approach has been successful.
 
Collaboratively edited and authored, Play the Past is dedicated to thoughtfully exploring and discussing the intersection of cultural heritage (very broadly defined) and games/meaningful play (equally broadly defined). Play the Past contributors come from a wide variety of backgrounds, domains, perspectives, and motivations (for being interested in both games and cultural heritage) – a fact which is evident in the wide variety of topics we tackle in our posts.
It is very important to note that Play the Past isn’t just about the intersection of cultural heritage and digital games, its also about non-digital games (boardgames, tabletop games, collectible card games, etc.), alternate reality games (ARGs), barely games (a term originally coined by Russel Davies – no, not the Doctor Who Russel Davies – and built upon by our very own Rob McDougall), and playful mechanics (or “gamifying” as its been recently called).
We are also very interested in exploring the spectrum of approaches to games – from the more “philosophical” (as some might call it) games studies side of things, to the more practically applied serious games/meaningful play side of things (and just about everything betwixt and between).
Inspired by Profhacker
Credit where credit is due. One of the most important inspirations for Play the Past comes from directly ProfHacker. You can see the fingerprints of ProfHacker all over Play the Past. From the way we do business behind the scenes to our commenting and community policy (which is pretty much shamelessly lifted verbatim from ProfHacker). This is no great surprise as Ethan Watrall (Play the Past’s editor) was in the first batch of ProfHacker writers. In this regard, we are extremely grateful to ProfHacker – and particularly ProfHacker’s two Editors: George H. Williams (@georgeonline on Twitter) and Jason B. Jones (@jbj on Twitter).
Interested in Contributing?
Interested in contributing to Play the Past (either on a regular basis or as a “one shot” guest author)? We’d love to hear from you. Drop us a line here and tell us a little bit about yourself and how you might contribute.
We are committed to fostering an environment characterized by generosity, creativity, and (as corny as it might sound) kindness. Comments on this blog are an important part of creating that environment, and this comment policy aims to communicate our values to new readers and encourage comments that will build up the online community here.
Thoughtful comments (even when–and often especially if–disagreeing) are encouraged and appreciated.
No snark allowed (see David Denby on definition of snark). While snark certainly has its virtues, this blog provides a space for people to be inexperienced at something, or even wrong, to facilitate learning. That’s harder to do in the face of either persistent or “drive-by” snark.
Play the Past should be a community built through regular contributions made by recognized–but not necessarily “real name”–contributors. Some commenters’ identities reveal their real names; other commenters use pseudonyms. Our online identities are built from our comments here and our presence–as commenters and authors–in other places on the web, in print, at conferences. Play the Past welcomes commenters–whether anonymous, psuedonymous, or publically identified–who are committed to creating a rich and respectful dialogue. We want commenters to be able to explore the complexities of Play the Past posts; we want commenters to inquire and debate; we want everyone to be able to learn from the conversation.
Links & images are encouraged. Gratuitous linking back to your own site is discouraged. Links in the “website” field should point only to profile pages or to personal websites.
Gravatars are strongly encouraged.
Jeremy Antley
Jeremy Antley is a writer/student/gamer who received his MA in History with a focus on the Russian Imperial period from the University of Kansas in 2007. While currently in the middle of researching the immigration of Russian Old Believers to Oregon in the mid-60′s for his doctoral ambitions, Jeremy also finds studying the life and culture of Russian peasants to be a fascinating topic. He looks at topics of digital culture, games and, of course, Russian history at his blog, Peasant Muse. Those interested in hearing the twitter ramblings of someone crazy enough to love Russian peasants would do well to check-out Jeremy’s handle- @jsantley. Having played many epic games of Axis & Allies as an undergraduate, Jeremy now plays a variety of board and console (xbox 360) games with his friends in his current residence of Portland, Oregon. Jeremy’s love of board games informs his current interest in how players modify their games and how looking at board games as platforms can inform historical inquiries.
Kevin Ballestrini
Kevin Ballestrini teaches Latin and Mythology at the Norwich Free Academy in Connecticut. He has received an M.A. and B.A. in Classics from the University of Colorado and University of Connecticut respectively. In addition to experience teaching in a traditional classroom setting, Kevin is deploying the first fully practomimetic introductory language course at the high school level this year in a section of Latin I. He hopes that the experience will enhance student engagement and connection to life and culture in ancient Rome. As an avid technology enthusiast, he maintains his blog, Techna Virumque Cano (http://kevinbal.blogspot.com) where he discusses the intersection of technology and his teaching. Kevin is also the leader of a Lord of the Rings Online kinship and has a great interest in exploring how games contribute to the development of (online) communities just as the bardic tradition contributed to the development of ancient communities. You can also find Kevin on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/kballestrini.
Emily Joy Bembeneck
Emily Bembeneck is a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Michigan in the Department of Classical Studies. She primarily works on narrative and character development in ancient epic and modern video games, both graphical and text-based. Other interests of hers include the image of the hero, Greek tragedy and social catharsis, cultural and individual identity through play, immersion, and game design, She teaches classes in Latin, Greek and Roman history, ancient war and entertainment, among other things related to the Classical world She is an active contributor at http://www.greywardens.com where she writes on the narrative structure of Bioware’s Dragon Age RPG franchise. Her current projects include working on images of Rome in ancient and modern culture, developing a Flash-based application that combines components of social play with narrative creation, and designing a Dragon Age module that explores Euripides’ Medea through post-primary narrative. When not being all academic and studious, she is likely either playing an elf in some virtual world or spending time with her two young sons. Find her online at Ada Play and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/adarel.
Andrew D. Devenney
Andrew D. Devenney is currently a Visiting Assistant Professor of World History at Grand Valley State University in Allendale, Michigan. A life-long and avid gamer of both video and role-playing games, Andrew has found elements of game-based learning, new media, and the digital humanities unconsciously seeping into his classroom over the last few years. As such, he has begun to experiment relentlessly on his students with these new ideas, techniques, and shiny toys, and is having a grand time doing it. Sometime in the relatively near future, Andrew hopes to deploy a new course that will explore global history through the medium of gaming (which means the class may very well morph into a giant, heavily modded, credit-based game of Dungeons and Dragons). Andrew can be found online at http://andrewdevenney.net and on Twitter as @adevenney.
Shawn Graham
Shawn Graham is Assistant Professor of Digital Humanities in the Department of History at Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada. He’s been blogging as ‘The Electric Archaeologist‘ since 2007, documenting his interest & experiments in game-based learning, agent based modeling, and other aspects of digital media for archaeological teaching and research. On Twitter, he’s at http://www.twitter.com/electricarchaeo. He’s published amongst other things a number of agent-based simulations on aspects of the Roman world, and has explored using Civilization mods in his distance-education classrooms. He received his PhD in Archaeology from the University of Reading in 2002, where he was interested in complexity & evolving networks in antiquity (especially in Rome). When he’s not geeking out over the latest tech toys or things archaeological, he is chief cider maker at Coronation Hall Cider Mills and playing Wii games with his family. If only there was wiiCivilization…
Matthew Kirschenbaum
Matthew Kirschenbaum is Associate Professor in the Department of English at the University of Maryland, Associate Director of the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH, an applied thinktank for the digital humanities), and Director of Digital Cultures and Creativity, a new “living/learning” program in the Honors College. Kirschenbaum speaks and writes often on topics in the digital humanities and new media; his work has received coverage in the Atlantic, New York Times, National Public Radio, Wired, Boing Boing, Slashdot, and the Chronicle of Higher Education. He has been pushing cardboard counters around on hexagonal grids since his early teens. See http://www.mkirschenbaum.net for more.
Katy Meyers
Katy Meyers is a graduate student in the Department of Anthropology,with a concentration in mortuary archaeology, at Michigan StateUniversity. She is currently a fellow in both the Cultural Heritage Informatics Initiative and the Campus Archaeology Program. She is also an editor of GradHacker, and the game designer for an Ancient Egyptbased mod of Civilization V. When she somehow finds free time she loves playing first person shooter and adventure video games, and is amajor fan of Milton-Bradley board game classics. She’s interested inthe role of games for outreach and education in archaeology and cultural heritage, as well as the biases they create. Katy can befound online at her blog http://www.bonesdontlie.com and on Twitter at @bonesdonotlie.
Jeremiah McCall
Jeremiah McCall has been teaching high school history for the past decade, mostly at Cincinnati Country Day School. His first professional love is high school teaching, especially designing instructional strategies that will engage and challenge his students to learn and grow. In addition to more conventional courses, Jeremiah also teaches senior elective on (tabletop) historical simulation design, and the intersection of serious games and contemporary global issues. Jeremiah’s primary training is in history with a PhD in ancient history from Ohio State University; he authored a book on the cavalry of the Roman Republic and is currently writing a historical biography of the Roman aristocrat M. Claudius Marcellus to be published by Pen and Sword press. He has recently completed a guidebook for teachers who wish to use simulation games in the history class. Titled Gaming the Past: Using Video Games to Teach Secondary History, the book was published by Routledge in June, 2011. As an extension of his teaching philosophy — that history is primarily the study and evaluation of competing interpretations of the past — McCall has conducted numerous classroom implementations of historical simulations as historical interpretations. He maintains the website gamingthepast.net, one of the primary sites devoted to the use of historical simulations in classroom teaching. He also plays far more video games — particularly RPGs and strategy — than you’d think he could find time for.
Rob MacDougall
Rob MacDougall is Assistant Professor of History at the University of Western Ontario and Associate Director of UWO’s Centre for American Studies, where he teaches United States history, the history of technology, and digital history methods. His research centers on the history of communication–he has just written a book on the early days of the telephone and is beginning a new book on the circulation of bad ideas. He blogs sporadically at Old is the New New and is on the Twitter at http://twitter.com/robotnik. A life-long gamer, Rob is interested in the history of gaming and in using games and play to encourage more playful historical thinking. His own play is largely non-digital of late–tabletop RPGs with his gamer buddies and make-believe with his kids–but he looks forward to seeing how good computer games will have gotten by the time he gets tenure.
Rebecca Mir
Rebecca Mir is a museum educator, researcher, and writer at various institutions in New York City. She will receive an M.A. in Decorative Arts, Design History, and Material Culture from the Bard Graduate Center in May 2012. She received her Bachelor’s degree in Art History from Indiana University of Pennsylvania in 2010. She often thinks about how (and why) artifacts and cultures are (mis)represented in video games and how museums are using games to engage and educate audiences. Rebecca can be found on Twitter as @hellenophile.
Trevor Owens
Trevor Owens is a digital archivist with the National Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program (NDIIP) at the Library of Congress and a doctoral student in the Graduate School of Education at George Mason University. Before joining the Library of Congress he worked as the community lead for the Zotero project at the Center for History and New Media helped organize the first two meetings of the Games, Learning, and Society Conference. He received a bachelors degree in the history of science form the University of Wisconsin, and a masters degree in American History with and emphasis on digital history from George Mason University. Trevor has spent considerable amounts of time playing all iterations of Civilization, but is also a big fan of role playing games (everything from Earthbound to Fallout). Trevor has published on the history of children’s books about Einstein and Curie, the discursive practices of Civ Modders, and the role of digital research tools in scholarship and teaching. When not researching, writing, or gaming, he also enjoys playing the violin. Trevor can be found online at http://www.trevorowens.org and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/tjowens
Roger Travis
Roger Travis is an Associate Professor of Classics in the Department of Literatures, Cultures & Languages of the University of Connecticut. He is also the Director of the Video Games and Human Values Initiative at UConn, an interdisciplinary online nexus for scholarly activities like monthly symposia and “playversations.” He received his Bachelor’s degree in classics from Harvard College, and his Ph.D. in comparative literature from the University of California, Berkeley before arriving at UConn in 1997. He has published on Homeric epic, Greek tragedy, Greek historiography, the 19th C. British novel, HALO, and the massively-multiplayer online role-playing game He has been President of the Classical Association of New England and of the Classical Association of Connecticut. He writes the blog Living Epic about the fundamental connection between ancient epic and the narrative video game, and is a founder and contributor of the collaborative blog Play the Past. In the 2009-2010 academic year, Roger offered the first courses ever designed entirely as practomimes.
Mark Sample
Mark Sample is an Assistant Professor of contemporary literature and new media studies in the Department of English at George Mason University. In addition to his work on electronic literature, videogames, and code studies, Mark is an outspoken advocate of open source pedagogy and open source research. In recognition of his commitment to innovation in teaching, Mark was the recipient of George Mason’s 2010 Teaching Excellence Award. Mark is a regular contributor to ProfHacker, and can also be found online at samplereality.com or on Twitter as @samplereality.
Ethan Watrall
Ethan Watrall is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Anthropology and Associate Director of Matrix:The Center for Humane Arts, Letters & Social Sciences Online at Michigan State University. In addition, Ethan is a Principal Investigator in the Games for Entertainment & Learning Lab, and co- founder of both the undergraduate Specialization and Game Design Development and the MA in Serious Game Design at Michigan State University. Ethan teaches (and has taught) in a wide variety of areas including cultural heritage informatics, ancient Egyptian social history & archaeology, archaeology and pop culture, user centered & user experience design, game design, serious game design, game studies. and history of various forms of popular and entertainment media (comics and digital games to name a few). When he’s not being all professorial, he’s a world class comic book nerd (Killowog is so his favorite Green Lantern), a sci-fi dork (he’ll argue to the grave that Tom Baker is the best Doctor ever), and an avid player of all sorts of games (digital, board, and tabletop). Ethan can be found online at http://www.captainprimate.com, and on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/captain_primate