A few days ago, Gao, Hu, Mao, and Perc posted a preprint of their forthcoming article comparing social and natural phenomena. The authors, apparently all engineers and physicists, use the google ngrams data to come to the conclusion that “social and natural phenomena are governed by fundamentally different processes.” The take-home message is that words describing natural phenomena increase in frequency at regular, predictable rates, whereas the use of certain socially-oriented words change in unpredictable ways. Unfortunately, the paper doesn’t necessarily differentiate between words and what they describe.
Specifically, the authors invoke random fractal theory (sort of a descendant of chaos theory) to find regular patterns in 1-grams. A 1-gram is just a single word, and this study looks at how the frequency of certain words grow or shrink over time. A “hurst parameter” is found for 24 words, a dozen pertaining to nature (earthquake, fire, etc.), and another dozen “social” words (war, unemployment, etc.). The hurst parameter (H) is a number which, essentially, reveals whether or not a time series of data is correlated with itself. That is, given a set of observations over the last hundred years, autocorrelated data means the observation for this year will very likely follow a predictable trend from the past.
If H is between 0.5 and 1, that means the dataset has “long-term positive correlation,” which is roughly equivalent to saying that data quite some time in the past will still positively and noticeably effect data today. If H is under 0.5, data are negatively correlated with their past, suggesting that a high value in the past implies a low value in the future, and if H = 0.5, the data likely describe Brownian motion (they are random). H can exceed 1 as well, a point which I’ll get to momentarily.
The authors first looked at the frequency of 12 words describing natural phenomena between 1770 and 2007. In each case, H was between 0.5 and 1, suggesting a long-term positive trend in the use of the terms. That is, the use of the term “earthquake” does not fluctuate terribly wildly from year to year; looking at how frequently it was used in the past can reasonably predict how frequently it will be used in the future. The data have a long “memory.”
Natural 1-grams from Gao et al. (2012)
The paper then analyzed 12 words describing social phenomena, with very different results. According to the authors, ”social phenomena, apart from rare exceptions, cannot be classiﬁed solely as processes with persistent-long range correlations.” For example, the use of the word “war” bursts around World War I and World War II; these are unpredictable moments in the discussion of social phenomena. The way “war” was used in the past was not a good predictor of how “war” would be used around 1915 and 1940, for obvious reasons.
Social 1-grams from Gao et al. (2012)
You may notice that, for many of the social terms, H is actually greater than 1, “which indicates that social phenomena are most likely to be either nonstationary, on-off intermittent, or Levy walk-like process.” Basically, the H parameter alone is not sufficient to describe what’s going on with the data. Nonstationary processes are, essentially, unpredictable. A stationary process can be random, but at least certain statistical properties of that randomness remain persistent. Nonstationary processes don’t have those persistent statistical properties. The authors point out that not all social phenomena will have H >1, citing famine, because it might relate to natural phenomena. They also point out that “the more the social phenomena can be considered recent (unemployment, recession, democracy), the higher their Hurst parameter is likely to be.”
In sum, they found that “The prevalence of long-term memory in natural phenomena [compels them] to conjecture that the long-range correlations in the usage frequency of the corresponding terms is predominantly driven by occurrences in nature of those phenomena,” whereas “it is clear that all these processes [describing social phenomena] are fundamentally different from those describing natural phenomena.” That the social phenomena follow different laws is not unexpected, they say, because they themselves are more complex; they rely on political, economic, and social forces, as well as natural phenomena.
While this paper is exceptionally interesting, and shows a very clever use of fairly basic data (24 one-dimensional variables, just looking at word use per year), it lacks the same sort of nuance also lacking in the original culturomics paper. Namely, in this case, it lacks the awareness that social and natural phenomena are not directly coupled with the words used to describe them, nor the frequency with which those words are used. The paper suggests that natural and social phenomena are governed by different scaling laws when, realistically, it is the way they are discussed, and how those discussions are published which are governed by the varying scaling laws. Further, although they used words exemplifying the difference between “nature” and “society,” the two are not always so easily disentangled, either in language or the underlying phenomena.
Perhaps the sort of words used to describe social events change differently than the sort used to describe natural events. Perhaps, because natural phenomena are often immediately felt across vast distances, whereas news of social phenomena can take some time to diffuse, how rapidly some words are discussed may take very different forms. Discussions and word-usage are always embedded in a larger network. Also needing to be taken into account is who is discussing social vs. natural phenomena, and which is more likely to get published and preserved to eventually be scanned by Google Books.
Without a doubt the authors have noticed a very interesting trend, but rather than matching the phenomena directly to word, as they did, we should be using this sort of study to look at how language changes, how people change, and ultimately what relationship people have with the things they discuss and publish. At this point, the engineers and physicists still have a greater comfort with the statistical tools needed to fully utilize the google books corpus, but there are some humanists out there already doing absolutely fantastic quantitative work with similar data.
This paper, while impressive, is further proof that the quantitative study of culture should not be left to those with (apparently) little background in the subject. While it is not unlikely that different factors do, in fact, determine the course of natural disasters versus that of human interaction, this paper does not convincingly tease those apart. It may very well be that the language use is indicative of differences in underlying factors in the phenomena described, however no study is cited suggesting this to be the case. Claims like “social and natural phenomena are governed by fundamentally different processes,” given the above language data, could easily have been avoided, I think, with a short discussion between the authors and a humanist.
Welcome to the scottbot irregular. My name’s Scott, and the US Government has for some reason seen fit to give me money to study Science. It’s ‘Science’ with a capital ‘S’ because I’m not studying individual aspects of the world using science, but rather studying Science in general as a social, historical, philosophical, and intellectual phenomenon. What’s worse, I’m attempting to do it scientifically. This blog is my attempt at giving the country its money’s worth. Also, I kinda would love feedback on my eventual dissertation. See? Everybody wins.
scott b. weingart
is pretty clueless about a lot of things. This is his attempt to be less so.
I pledge to be a good scholarly citizen. This includes:
Opening all data generated by me for the purpose of a publication at the time of publication.
Opening all code generated by me for the purpose of a publication at the time of publication.
Freely distributing all published material for which I have the right, and fighting to retain those rights in situations where that is not the case.
Fighting for open access of all materials worked on as a co-author, participant in a grant, or consultant on a project.
I pledge to support open access by:
Only reviewing for journals which plan to release their publications openly.
Donating to free open source software initiatives where I would otherwise have paid for proprietary software.
Citing open publications if there is a choice between two otherwise equivalent sources.
I pledge never to let work get in the way of play.
I pledge to give people chocolate occasionally if I think they’re awesome.
_
[This is somewhat out of date. Please stand by for new information!]
Hello World!
Student of History & Philosophy of Science and Information Science at Indiana University.
You’ve managed to stumble across my little corner of the internet. I’m currently a student and researcher in the HPS and SLIS departments at IUB under two of the most interesting and capable professors I’ve had the fortune to meet: Colin Allen and Katy Börner. I studied history of science and computer engineering at UF, where I slaved researched for the infinitely patient Robert A. Hatch, who taught me more in four short years than I’d yet learned in aggregate over my entire life.
Early InPhO Concept Map
These days, I split my time between classes, the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO) and the Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science Center (CNS). At InPhO I program and design visual, navigable representations of our dynamically generated taxonomy of ideas; analyze relational networks (influenced, disagreed with, etc.) from our Thinkers database; and map and compare philosophical ontologies. The CNS keeps me busy with all sorts of scientometric analyses, and I am also involved in the development of large scale network analysis software such as the NWB, creating workflows, providing software feedback, writing documentation and teaching workshops.
Co-authorship network created using the Network Workbench Tool
Research
How do changes in communication structures and technologies affect scientific discourse and collaboration?
Science is totally rad. So I study it.
There are all sorts of ways to study science, of course, and you can’t leave out even one if you want to understand Science as a whole. That means taking a look at its philosophy, history, anthropology, culture and all sorts of other things as well (perhaps even sociology!). It also means looking at (gasp) the science itself, because no self-respecting scholar should claim to understand physics and physicists without being able to calculate the distance the bullet travels before it falls.
My overarching research is in modeling and mapping the growth of science on a large scale – thematically, geographically and temporally – hoping eventually to reveal what conditions yield the most rapid rate of discovery and innovation. Looking back, we see times when scientific progress lurches forward at alarming rates, times when studies come to a halt, times when great minds exposit to deaf ears. Sometimes the reasons are obvious: burned libraries, overthrown empires, new sources of funding, technological breakthroughs, wars that need to be won. But these are heavy brush-strokes painted across the canvas of history.
If we could somehow view the whole of scientific endeavors for the last thousand years, across every topic and in every city, with the same fine granularity used to research modern-day science, imagine how much we could learn. By zooming out and looking for “hot spots” of innovation in the history of science, and by understanding the environment in which these hot spots formed, we can learn how to induce those same ideal conditions in modern day research.
If the synthesis of new ideas in physics tends to come from young researchers working on their own and with backgrounds in other fields, funds can be allotted to make sure more of those exist. If medical innovations come fastest when small groups of experts collaborate, or if science in general runs smoother in small-world type collaborative networks rather than completely connected networks, that information can be used to focus funding in just the right way to improve the rate of innovation.
The closest we can come to that fine granularity, to understanding science across contexts, is by using as many research tools as we can find. We must be comfortable working in whatever discipline with whatever methodology is necessary to find the answers sought. Huge historical data sets will be a must. Scientometricians and others in related fields do an amazing job of learning the structure of modern science, but that structure is necessarily bound to the mediums it inhabits. Modern science is a beast of national laboratories, e-mails, universities, cited journals, click-throughs, conferences and page hits.
Marshall McLuhan may or may not have been correct when he claimed “the medium is the message,” but there is no doubt that the medium plays a large role in how science is adopted, disseminated and studied. That role cannot be understood without stepping back and viewing all of the alternatives – correspondences, scientific societies, book transcriptions, etc.
Dutch Republic of Letters created in collaboration with The Huygens Instituut
The task, then, is to collect as much data as possible, as far back as we can. We should track where books traveled within Medieval Europe and Asia; who corresponded with whom, how often, and about what during the Early Modern period; who taught whom and where scientists studied; how many books were published in what languages; what universities had copies of which journals; where shared resources traveled.
This is an impossible amount of data, of course, and can only exist if created collaboratively and in the spirit of openness. These are not ideas to be copyrighted – they are numbers and data points, and they should be accessible and compatible and aggregated in one place. A History of Science Data Commons, so to speak. More on that project coming soon.
Trying to understand all of it at once is a big task… and absolutely impossible.  I’ve sliced myself two pieces of the pie that are hopefully manageable and definitely inseparable:
Periods of rapid scientific production and progress.
Inflection points in scientific communication and collaboration.
Changes in communication structures and technologies obviously affect scientific progress deeply, and it is exactly what those effects are that I hope to uncover. Scientific revolutions and media revolutions, what a tired subject! Well, perhaps, but there are two very good reasons they’re overstudied: they’re terribly important, and nobody’s got them right yet.
Interests
Courtney and I contact juggling
Thankfully for my friends and family I do not work 24/7. When not working, I can often be found juggling, attending renaissance festivals, geocaching, camping, campaigning for rationality, and reading science fiction & fantasy novels. When I feel guilty about not working, but not enough to actually get back to work, I read about physics, cognitive science and linguistics. I am also perpetually writing a history of the obscure art of contact juggling.
Juggling has been a big part of my life for nearly a decade now; I was president of Objects in Motion (UF Juggling Club) for a few years and brought the club from 3 to 30 active members, taught lessons at Groovolution dance studio, and performed with Circle & Spice in Bloomington. I’m now involved in the IU Juggling Club and juggle irregularly at the Bloomington Farmer’s Market. I have performed as far north as Calgary, as far east as Amsterdam, as far west as Los Angeles, all the way south in Miami, and all sorts of places in between.
None of that would have been possible without my good friends and co-performers in the Spherocity contact juggling troupe: Matt, Jay, Cory, Courtney, Steve, and Leighanna. Thanks to Nick, Nicole, Leah, Ian and the rest of the crew, Objects in Motion keeps growing larger and better and I miss them terribly. And if you’re reading this, Sierra, you should start juggling again.
Juggling knives in Calgary
As if there’s not enough on my plate already, I’m also involved in two wonderful pseudo-academic organizations. I co-founded Sophosessions with Warren C. Moore, the coolest cat I know, in my junior year at UF. The group still meets a little more than monthly and allows its two-dozen members to present talks on whatever they feel like, from Chinese calligraphy to Zen Buddhism to advanced fractal mathematics to building robots. Then everyone goes to Ben & Jerry’s. I still webcast into meetings whenever I can, but it’s just not the same without the ice-cream.
The Venerable IU Beer & Algorithms Club fills two Monday nights a month, and I get to listen to a bunch of Computer Science and Math graduates present their favorite algorithms in gory detail, all while eating a tasty meal and enjoying an equally tasty beverage. What could be better?