Well, it looks like Digital Humanities Now scooped me on posting my own article. As some of you may have read, I recently did not submit a paper on the Republic of Letters, opting instead to hold off until I could submit it to a journal which allowed authorial preprint distribution. Preprints are a vital part of rapid knowledge exchange in our ever-quickening world, and while some disciplines have embraced the preprint culture, many others have yet to. I’d love the humanities to embrace that practice, and in the spirit of being the change you want to see in the world, I’ve decided to post a preprint of my Republic of Letters paper, which I will be submitting to another journal in the near future. You can read the full first draft here.
The paper, briefly, is an attempt to contextualize the Republic of Letters and the Scientific Revolution using modern computational methodologies. It draws from secondary sources on the Republic of Letters itself, especially from my old mentor R.A. Hatch, some network analysis from sociology and statistical physics, modeling, human dynamics, and complexity theory. All of this is combined through datasets graciously donated by the Dutch Circulation of Knowledge group and Oxford’s Cultures of Knowledge project, totaling about 100,000 letters worth of metadata. Because it favors large scale quantitative analysis over an equally important close and qualitative analysis, the paper is a contribution to historiopgraphic methodology rather than historical narrative; that is, it doesn’t say anything particularly novel about history, but it does offer a (fairly) new way of looking at and contextualizing it.
A visualization of the Dutch Republic of Letters using Sci2 & Gephi
At its core, the paper suggests that by looking at how scholarly networks naturally grow and connect, we as historians can have new ways to tease out what was contingent upon the period and situation. It turns out that social networks of a certain topology are basins of attraction similar to those I discussed in Flow and Empty Space. With enough time and any of a variety of facilitating social conditions and technologies, a network similar in shape and influence to the Republic of Letters will almost inevitably form. Armed with this knowledge, we as historians can move back to the microhistories and individuated primary materials to find exactly what those facilitating factors were, who played the key roles in the network, how the network may differ from what was expected, and so forth. Essentially, this method is one base map we can use to navigate and situate historical narrative.
Of course, I make no claims of this being the right way to look at history, or the only quantitative base map we can use. The important point is that it raises new kinds of questions and is one mechanism to facilitate the re-integration of the individual and the longue durée, the close and the distant reading.
The project casts a necessarily wide net. I do not yet, and probably could not ever, have mastery over each and every disciplinary pool I draw from. With that in mind, I welcome comments, suggestions, and criticisms from historians, network analysts, modelers, sociologists, and whomever else cares to weigh in. Whomever helps will get a gracious acknowledgement in the final version, good scholarly karma, and a cookie if we ever meet in person. The draft will be edited and submitted in the coming months, and if you have ideas, please post them in the comment section below. Also, if you use ideas from the paper, please cite it as an unpublished manuscript or, if it gets published, cite that version instead.
Welcome to the scottbot irregular. My name’s Scott, and the US Government has for some reason seen fit to give me money to study Science. It’s ‘Science’ with a capital ‘S’ because I’m not studying individual aspects of the world using science, but rather studying Science in general as a social, historical, philosophical, and intellectual phenomenon. What’s worse, I’m attempting to do it scientifically. This blog is my attempt at giving the country its money’s worth. Also, I kinda would love feedback on my eventual dissertation. See? Everybody wins.
scott b. weingart
is pretty clueless about a lot of things. This is his attempt to be less so.
I pledge to be a good scholarly citizen. This includes:
Opening all data generated by me for the purpose of a publication at the time of publication.
Opening all code generated by me for the purpose of a publication at the time of publication.
Freely distributing all published material for which I have the right, and fighting to retain those rights in situations where that is not the case.
Fighting for open access of all materials worked on as a co-author, participant in a grant, or consultant on a project.
I pledge to support open access by:
Only reviewing for journals which plan to release their publications openly.
Donating to free open source software initiatives where I would otherwise have paid for proprietary software.
Citing open publications if there is a choice between two otherwise equivalent sources.
I pledge never to let work get in the way of play.
I pledge to give people chocolate occasionally if I think they’re awesome.
_
[This is somewhat out of date. Please stand by for new information!]
Hello World!
Student of History & Philosophy of Science and Information Science at Indiana University.
You’ve managed to stumble across my little corner of the internet. I’m currently a student and researcher in the HPS and SLIS departments at IUB under two of the most interesting and capable professors I’ve had the fortune to meet: Colin Allen and Katy Börner. I studied history of science and computer engineering at UF, where I slaved researched for the infinitely patient Robert A. Hatch, who taught me more in four short years than I’d yet learned in aggregate over my entire life.
Early InPhO Concept Map
These days, I split my time between classes, the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO) and the Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science Center (CNS). At InPhO I program and design visual, navigable representations of our dynamically generated taxonomy of ideas; analyze relational networks (influenced, disagreed with, etc.) from our Thinkers database; and map and compare philosophical ontologies. The CNS keeps me busy with all sorts of scientometric analyses, and I am also involved in the development of large scale network analysis software such as the NWB, creating workflows, providing software feedback, writing documentation and teaching workshops.
Co-authorship network created using the Network Workbench Tool
Research
How do changes in communication structures and technologies affect scientific discourse and collaboration?
Science is totally rad. So I study it.
There are all sorts of ways to study science, of course, and you can’t leave out even one if you want to understand Science as a whole. That means taking a look at its philosophy, history, anthropology, culture and all sorts of other things as well (perhaps even sociology!). It also means looking at (gasp) the science itself, because no self-respecting scholar should claim to understand physics and physicists without being able to calculate the distance the bullet travels before it falls.
My overarching research is in modeling and mapping the growth of science on a large scale – thematically, geographically and temporally – hoping eventually to reveal what conditions yield the most rapid rate of discovery and innovation. Looking back, we see times when scientific progress lurches forward at alarming rates, times when studies come to a halt, times when great minds exposit to deaf ears. Sometimes the reasons are obvious: burned libraries, overthrown empires, new sources of funding, technological breakthroughs, wars that need to be won. But these are heavy brush-strokes painted across the canvas of history.
If we could somehow view the whole of scientific endeavors for the last thousand years, across every topic and in every city, with the same fine granularity used to research modern-day science, imagine how much we could learn. By zooming out and looking for “hot spots” of innovation in the history of science, and by understanding the environment in which these hot spots formed, we can learn how to induce those same ideal conditions in modern day research.
If the synthesis of new ideas in physics tends to come from young researchers working on their own and with backgrounds in other fields, funds can be allotted to make sure more of those exist. If medical innovations come fastest when small groups of experts collaborate, or if science in general runs smoother in small-world type collaborative networks rather than completely connected networks, that information can be used to focus funding in just the right way to improve the rate of innovation.
The closest we can come to that fine granularity, to understanding science across contexts, is by using as many research tools as we can find. We must be comfortable working in whatever discipline with whatever methodology is necessary to find the answers sought. Huge historical data sets will be a must. Scientometricians and others in related fields do an amazing job of learning the structure of modern science, but that structure is necessarily bound to the mediums it inhabits. Modern science is a beast of national laboratories, e-mails, universities, cited journals, click-throughs, conferences and page hits.
Marshall McLuhan may or may not have been correct when he claimed “the medium is the message,” but there is no doubt that the medium plays a large role in how science is adopted, disseminated and studied. That role cannot be understood without stepping back and viewing all of the alternatives – correspondences, scientific societies, book transcriptions, etc.
Dutch Republic of Letters created in collaboration with The Huygens Instituut
The task, then, is to collect as much data as possible, as far back as we can. We should track where books traveled within Medieval Europe and Asia; who corresponded with whom, how often, and about what during the Early Modern period; who taught whom and where scientists studied; how many books were published in what languages; what universities had copies of which journals; where shared resources traveled.
This is an impossible amount of data, of course, and can only exist if created collaboratively and in the spirit of openness. These are not ideas to be copyrighted – they are numbers and data points, and they should be accessible and compatible and aggregated in one place. A History of Science Data Commons, so to speak. More on that project coming soon.
Trying to understand all of it at once is a big task… and absolutely impossible.  I’ve sliced myself two pieces of the pie that are hopefully manageable and definitely inseparable:
Periods of rapid scientific production and progress.
Inflection points in scientific communication and collaboration.
Changes in communication structures and technologies obviously affect scientific progress deeply, and it is exactly what those effects are that I hope to uncover. Scientific revolutions and media revolutions, what a tired subject! Well, perhaps, but there are two very good reasons they’re overstudied: they’re terribly important, and nobody’s got them right yet.
Interests
Courtney and I contact juggling
Thankfully for my friends and family I do not work 24/7. When not working, I can often be found juggling, attending renaissance festivals, geocaching, camping, campaigning for rationality, and reading science fiction & fantasy novels. When I feel guilty about not working, but not enough to actually get back to work, I read about physics, cognitive science and linguistics. I am also perpetually writing a history of the obscure art of contact juggling.
Juggling has been a big part of my life for nearly a decade now; I was president of Objects in Motion (UF Juggling Club) for a few years and brought the club from 3 to 30 active members, taught lessons at Groovolution dance studio, and performed with Circle & Spice in Bloomington. I’m now involved in the IU Juggling Club and juggle irregularly at the Bloomington Farmer’s Market. I have performed as far north as Calgary, as far east as Amsterdam, as far west as Los Angeles, all the way south in Miami, and all sorts of places in between.
None of that would have been possible without my good friends and co-performers in the Spherocity contact juggling troupe: Matt, Jay, Cory, Courtney, Steve, and Leighanna. Thanks to Nick, Nicole, Leah, Ian and the rest of the crew, Objects in Motion keeps growing larger and better and I miss them terribly. And if you’re reading this, Sierra, you should start juggling again.
Juggling knives in Calgary
As if there’s not enough on my plate already, I’m also involved in two wonderful pseudo-academic organizations. I co-founded Sophosessions with Warren C. Moore, the coolest cat I know, in my junior year at UF. The group still meets a little more than monthly and allows its two-dozen members to present talks on whatever they feel like, from Chinese calligraphy to Zen Buddhism to advanced fractal mathematics to building robots. Then everyone goes to Ben & Jerry’s. I still webcast into meetings whenever I can, but it’s just not the same without the ice-cream.
The Venerable IU Beer & Algorithms Club fills two Monday nights a month, and I get to listen to a bunch of Computer Science and Math graduates present their favorite algorithms in gory detail, all while eating a tasty meal and enjoying an equally tasty beverage. What could be better?