Comments Off
Digital Humanities Now is pleased to announce the Journal of Digital Humanities (ISSN 2165-6673), forthcoming in March 2012. In this comprehensive, peer-reviewed, open access journal we will feature the best scholarship, projects, and tools produced by the digital humanities community in the previous quarter.
The Journal of Digital Humanities will offer expanded coverage of the digital humanities in three ways. First, we publish scholarly work beyond the traditional research article. Second, we select content from open and public discussions in the field. Third, we encourage continued discussion through peer-to-peer review.
The journal will be comprised of individual works that were selected as Editors’ Choice in Digital Humanities Now. These works range from written texts, to visual arguments, to audio-visual presentations. In order to promote the peer review of non-traditional scholarship, each issue will include solicited reviews of digital tools. When the community focuses extensively on a particular topic, a special section of the issue will feature the broader conversation. In our inaugural issue, Natalia Cecire, a postdoctoral fellow at the Fox Center for Humanistic Inquiry at Emory University, will introduce and guest edit a special section about theory and the digital humanities.
The works considered for inclusion in the Journal were made available for public consumption outside of formal publication methods by more than 400 scholars and groups in our Compendium of the Digital Humanities. From the more than 15,000 pieces published or shared by the digital humanities community last quarter, 85 were selected as Editors’ Choice in Digital Humanities Now. Of these 85, the ones that most influenced the community, as measured by interest, transmission, and response, have been selected for formal publication in the Journal.
We invite the digital humanities community to participate further in the review process through open peer review of the items selected for the Journal from February 14-29. If you would like your work to be considered for Digital Humanities Now and the next issue of the Journal, you can learn how to submit your work.
Our hope is that scholarship in the digital humanities is both refined and expanded through an open discussion of the ideas proposed and the methods pursued in the Journal.
- The Editors
Dan Cohen, Sasha Hoffman, Jeri Wieringa, and Joan Fragaszy Troyano
Comments