Since this is a blog post, I hope you will forgive me if I begin with a geek confession.
My name is Ernesto and I'm a shareaholic. I'm a compulsive sharer. The roots for this might be in my childhood. I'm a product of the mid 70s and the semi-Communist reality of a pre-NAFTA Mexico. When I was a kid I was really into Star Wars action figures. Some of them were very hard to get (and therefore expensive) and the domestic versions of the figures were always very far behind the US releases, and this made building a collection very difficult. Some figures were basically never available as domestic releases. The knowledge that the collection was meant to be larger was a source of frustration.
I had neighbours and friends who were better off or had parents who travelled to the US frequently for work and bought them every single Star Wars toy available. Often it seemed to me these kids who had it all were really not that interested: they had them and that was it. When they saw that my little brother and I were really excited to see in real life a figure or ship we had only seen on the back board of another figure's packaging, these kids often grew smug. They didn't like to share.
My brother and I, on the other hand, shared all our toys. Luckily our best childhood friends also collected Star Wars toys and whenever they visited or we visited they brought their action figures and we grouped them all in a single collection. We didn't know it back then but what we were doing was crowdsourcing a collection. Against the curation best practices of the time we liked mixing action figures from different series and brands (i.e., Battlestar Galactica and The Black Hole figures with Star Wars toys). It was definied by our personal tastes and also financial and geographical constraints. Even when I was 7 or 8 I realised it was ironic that those who had the complete collection didn't really care too much about it, and that we would get so much joy from joining our humble individual efforts.
 Figures 1 and 2: Return of the Jedi action figure back cards, Left: US version; Right: Mexico version (yes; the image is actually a colour photo).
Courtesy of The Star Wars Archive Data Base.
Figure 3: Crowdsourcing a collection, circa 1985.
But this post is not about crowdsourcing, if by that we understand the act of collective data gathering or collective user content generation and management. This post is about sharing, not toys but links. I mainly use Twitter and Tumblr to share links to what I read and find interesting. Most of it relates to my own academic research interests. I guess I could use Twitter only to chat with others, "to network" as one does, say, during a conference lunch break or party, but without the real-life social awkwardness that characterises (it seems to me) academic networking. I do a bit of this, but for more than three years I've been mainly using Twitter to share links to work online; some of these links direct to my own online publications and work, but the majority lead to the work of others.
I have been conducting research with different URL shorteners which provide statistics about the links I share. My plan is to gather enough evidence to craft a proper academic article about it. In the meanwhile, I can say that the evidence has been an eye-opener for me. There has been much talk recently about "maximising" and measuring academic impact through blogging and social media (as well as the academic impact of online publications and resources), but what is not often discussed thoroughly is what the meaning of "maximising" is in this context.
"Maximising" seems to refer to the quantitative, rather than the qualitative, implying that "impact" is necessarily related to how many people or visits or clicks or downloads a given online resource is getting. So-called "altmetrics" and the more-established webometrics or statistical cybermetrics seek to recognise the need of measuring the role that sharing links online has on increasing academic impact, but it seems to me that beyond an emphasis on the numbers what is also needed is to zoom in the fine detail of who is actually behind all that tweeting, citing, clicking and downloading. It also seems to me current discourses about the use of metrics to assess digital scholarship or the effects of social media on academic impact often assume (without much evidence) that if there are a lot of academics on Twitter then it means that they are all clicking and retweeting each other's academic work.
The data revealed bymy comparison of links I have tweeted using three different URL shorteners show no correlation between the number of RTs and the number a given link is actually clicked on (i.e. visited), indicating that though several people retweeted presumably because they found the information relevant, they did not click on the link the tweet contained even once, arguably meaning the tweet did not add any visits to the linked resource. On the other hand, links tweeted only once have been clicked several times.
Often, the links that have been clicked numerous times had no academic value whatsoever (namely my recent tweeted photo of a London sunset). Obviously, one would need to compare the linked resource's analytics, and ideally logs, to make a more reliable or educated comparative guess about the correlation between someone's tweeting of a link, its retweets and its impact on the actual resource.
The figures I have been gathering and measuring about engagement with my tweeted links offer a very limited (and indeed not very reliable) interpretation of a more complex scenario, and often I have been able to evaluate the value of qualitative sharing only because I know the specific context in which a given link was clicked. In one case, I tweeted a link to an academic blog post that was a response to another academic blog post; this was clicked only once by one of my followers who did not follow the author of the linked article. The person got in touch with the article's author on Twitter directly, mainly because the article discussed another article whose author was a faculty member of the school directed by my follower.
I call this qualitative impact: in this specific case my sharing of one particular link produced only one click, but the person who clicked on it would not have found the article that quickly otherwise (perhaps she wouldn't have found that article at all!). Morevoer, the person who did the only one click was indeed the exact target audience for that article.
Who cares if this link did not get as many clicks as a corny photo if the user who did click on it was just "the right" stakeholder, which can potentially unleash an unpredictable series of positive academic outcomes?
This is what I have been calling "the After-Life" of Links. We've reached the point in which sharing links on Twitter or Facebook is almost as effective as handing out flyers on London's Tottenham Court Road. Therefore the "Impact" that should be assessed is not necessarily quantitative, but qualitative. In digital as in print, a resource or publication only achieves its full potential if it finds a readership that appreciates it (and ideally "does" something with it). (Apologies for the emphasis on bold).
As with the slightly embarrassing childhood memory I began this post with, the joy of lasting "Impact" is not in quantity but in quality. I never heard again from those kids who, when I was little, were not interested in sharing. With those guys in the photo above, I am and have been friends with for (gasp!) nearly three decades.